(bright music) - So we have briefly introduced Markov random fields. Now, a key concept in understanding these models is conditional independence. So let's explore this a little bit. Let's start with a little example, a little toy example of conditional independence. So let's say we have two people, Alice and Bob, who don't know each other. They are complete strangers. However, every evening, they drive home from work along the same road. Now, Alice is late for dinner if one of two things happens. Either she leaves work late or there happens to be a lot of traffic that day along that road. Similarly with Bob, he's late for dinner if one of two things happens, either he leaves late, or there's a lot of traffic along that road. So let's define three Boolean random variables that pertain to this situation. The first variable, A, tells us whether Alice is late for dinner. It's A equals one if Alice is late, otherwise A equals zero. Variable B says whether Bob is late for dinner. And variable T says whether there's a lot of traffic that day. Three Boolean random variables. Now let's answer some questions. First of all, are A and B independent? No, they're not. If Alice is late for dinner, that means it's more likely that there's a lot of traffic that day, which means that it's also more likely that Bob is late for dinner. That's strange. So these two people are complete strangers, and yet whether they're late for dinner is not independent, okay? It is the traffic that binds them together. Now suppose we condition on the traffic. Is A independent of B given T? So for example, let's say that there is no traffic that day, T equals zero. Is A independent of B given that? And the answer is yes, because if there's no traffic, the only thing that can make Alice late is leaving late. And the only thing that can make Bob late is leaving late. And those two events are independent. So we'll say that A is independent of B conditioned on T equals zero. What if T equals one? What if there's a lot of traffic that day? Okay, so there's a lot of traffic. That means it's more likely that A is late, that Alice is late and that Bob is late. But still, whether they're actually late just depends on the additional information of whether they leave work late. So once again, A is independent of B given this information. And so we have two random variables, A and B, that are not independent, but they are independent conditioned on T. The way we draw this using a graphical model is something like this. We have three random variables and A and B are correlated. There is some dependence between them, but the only dependence between them is mediated through T. So A and B are not independent, but once you condition on T, it's like removing this node, and it breaks A and B apart, it makes them independent. Okay, so that was just a little example for some intuition. Now let's go ahead and formally define conditional independence. So we have three random variables, X, Y, and Z. And we say that X is conditionally independent of Y given Z if the following holds. If for all possible settings of these variables, little x, little y, and little z, the probability that X is little x and Y is little y given that Z is little z is equal to the probability that X is little x given Z is little z times the probability that Y is little y given that Z is little z. Okay, in other words, if we condition on the event that Z takes this value, X and Y behave like they're independent, so we write it like this. X is independent of Y given Z. That's the notation. Okay, so let's look at another example now. Let's say that X and Y are independent coin flips taking values zero and one, okay? So they're each zero or one with probability 1/2 and they're independent, and let Z be the and of X and Y, okay? So Z is one if both X and Y are one, otherwise Z is zero. Is X conditionally independent of Y given Z? Hmm. Well, let's see. First of all, we do know that X is independent of Y. We are told that. So good, we've got that. But now what happens when we condition on Z? Well, let's see, suppose we have Z equals zero. What does that tell us? It tells us that X and Y cannot both be one. In other words, if X is one, then Y has to be zero. That means that X and Y are not independent conditioned on Z equals zero. So X and Y are not independent conditioned on Z. So here we have a situation where X and Y are independent just by themselves, but when we introduce this third random variable Z, it creates a dependence between them. They stop being independent when we condition on Z. Okay, so now let's return to our example from last time, the example from Pearl's textbook in which there are four individuals, two men and two women, and there's a disease going around. Now, the interactions between these four people are captured by this interaction graph, this dependency graph, and in defining Markov random fields, we said that a distribution factors over this graph if it has this functional form, if the distribution, if the joint distribution of any set of four values, of any configuration can be expressed as a product of local terms, one for each of the edges in this graph. In other words, you can figure out the probability of any configuration just by looking at pairs of variables, pairs of people that interact. And for example, these are what these functions, which we call clique potentials, might be. Okay. The values of the functions are arbitrary. What matters is just that they're positive. Now, what are the conditional independence properties of such a distribution? So let's look at the two women, for example. Is F1 independent of F2? There's no edge between them, but they are dependent because they can communicate a disease from one to the other through either of the two men. So they are not independent of each other. However, they are conditionally independent given the status of the two men. And likewise, the two men are conditionally independent of each other, their disease status is conditionally independent of each other given the status of the two women. So these are the conditional independence properties of this distribution. Now, this seems fairly intuitive from the graph, but conditional independence is a mathematical property. So we should go ahead and try to establish this formally to see how we can arrive at this conclusion solely from this functional form. Okay, so this is what our distribution looks like. And what we wanna check is, for example, that M1 is independent of M2 given F1 and F2. How would we do this? Well, let's pick any values for F1 and F2. Remember, they're binary, so they're in the range zero or one. So pick any values, little f1 and little f2. And now let's see, the probability of M1 and M2 conditioned on F1 being little f1 and F2 being little f2. What is it? Well, we don't know what this normalizing factor is. Doesn't matter. It's proportional, okay? This is the proportional sign. It's proportional to these four functions, which is psi one, one times, now we plug in the specific value little f1. M1 is still a variable, okay? And now we plug in, again, the specific value little f1, while M2 is still a variable. And likewise, we get psi two, one with little f2 and the variable M1, and psi two, two with little f2 and the variable M2. So now let's reorganize these terms. Let us group together these two. So we get something like this. And then let's group together the other two. And so we get something like this. And so if you notice, over here, we have a function only of M1. And over here, we have a function of only M2. And so the probability of any pair M1, M2 conditioned on the values little f1 and little f2 are something that depends only on capital M1 times something that depends only on capital M2. So M1 and M2 are indeed independent conditioned on F1 and F2. So now that we've looked at this little example, let's move on to Markov random fields in greater generality. So let's start by recalling the definition of a Markov random field. So we have a joint distribution over n random variables, say X1 through Xn. And the way we specify this distribution is by first drawing an undirected graph with a node for each of these variables and where the edges capture dependencies between variables. Once we've specified the graph, we say that a joint distribution P factors over the graph, conforms to the graph if it happens to have the following functional form. If it can be expressed as the product of a bunch of local terms, where there is a local term for each maximal clique in the graph. And that local term is a function called a clique potential that depends only on the variables inside that clique. So a distribution factors over the graph if it can be expressed as the product of local terms, one for each of the cliques in the graph, and we have a normalizing factor in the front that makes sure that everything adds up to one. Now, these clique potentials can have arbitrary values as long as they are positive. So here's a little example over here. We have a graph, and in order to determine the functional form of the distribution, what we do first is identify the maximal cliques in the graph. Here is one of the maximal cliques. Here is another one, here is another one, and here is another one. There are four maximal cliques. And so the functional form of the distribution is as follows. There's one term, one clique potential that is a term that looks only at the variables in that clique, X1, X2, X3, and another term that looks only at the variables in the second clique. And another one that looks only at the variables in the third clique. And another one that looks only at the variables in the fourth clique. These are all local terms. So what are the conditional independence properties of distributions like this, okay? So let's say we have a distribution, a joint distribution that factors over some graph G. What are the conditional independence properties of this distribution? Well, it'll be helpful to have a little notation. Let N of a node be its neighbors, okay? So if we have a node X of i, N of X of i is its neighbors, the nodes right next to it. So the local independence property says that the only dependence between Xi and the rest of the graph is through its neighbors. Any dependence between Xi and a variable far away goes through the neighbors of Xi. In other words, Xi is conditionally independent of everything else once you condition on its neighbors. Okay, so this is a local independence property. There's also a global independence property. So let's see what that means. Let's say we have a graph like this. Let's say it looks something like this. Okay. And let's say that we call these nodes S, and let's say that we call these nodes T. Now, there are dependencies between S and T, but let's find a set of nodes that separates them. For example, this set over here, let's call that U. If we were to remove U, S would get disconnected from T. And therefore the global conditional independence property says that X of S, the set of variables X of S is independent of X of T conditioned on X of U. In fact, you can see that the local property is just a special case of this, okay? So these are independence properties that are very intuitive given the graph. What is perhaps the most remarkable of all is the Hammersley-Clifford theorem. And what it says is that any distribution that actually has these independence properties must have the functional form of the Markov random field, okay? So to be precise, let's look at any distribution, any arbitrary distribution that happens to have these independence properties. If the distribution satisfies those properties, then the distribution must look like this. Okay? So starting with the conditional independence properties of a distribution, which is just qualitative information, we can infer the precise functional form of the distribution. This is quite a remarkable result, and it shows how Markov random fields are really very tightly intertwined with the notion of conditional independence. 