(light music) - When talking about Markov random fields, we mentioned that they are special cases of energy-based models. Now let's turn to this more general class of probability distributions. An energy-based model is any probability distribution that's of this form. The probability of any vector x is proportional to e to the minus U of x. U of x is called the energy function and it can be just about anything. For instance, we could have a neural net be our U of x. Now the fact that there's this proportionality over here means that the actual probability of any given vector x is one over some normalizing factor times e to the minus U of x. What is this normalizing factor? Well, we'll be looking at many cases now where x is continuous and so the normalizing factor is the integral, okay? Over e to the minus U of x dx, the normalizing factor is something that makes sure that the distribution sums to one. Unfortunately computing this integral is in general gonna be intractable. So we will have to give up on knowing the normalization factor. Whatever that factor is, we don't know what it's. So what can we do without knowing the normalization? What can we do when all we have is this energy function and we don't know what the constant of proportionality is? Can we compute likelihoods? Can we compute the probability of any configuration x? No, we cannot, in order to get a concrete probability, we need that normalizing factor. Can we sample without knowing the normalization factor? It turns out that we can. We've already seen one method for doing this, the Gibbs sampler, and soon we'll see another. This in fact turns out to be the biggest saving grace that enables energy-based models. Can we generate the most likely explanation or completion? If we have observations for some of the variables, can we find the most likely setting of the remaining variables? It turns out that we can do this too with some work. For example, using simulated annealing. And finally, can we learn models like this? Can we learn the best neural network for our data? And it turns out that yes, we can, again, with some work. Now the fact that we can do these things has made it possible to use energy-based models for modeling all sorts of complicated distributions. So here's one example where these two authors learned an energy-based model for ImageNet128. So they fit an energy-based model, a neural net, to this large data set of images, and here are some samples from the distribution they got. Okay, so this was the learn distribution and these are some samples generated from that distribution. Are they good? Well, they look really good from far away. And when you look at them a little bit more closely, they're not that great, but still it's all quite impressive. One of the really cool things that you can do with energy-based models, one of the many cool things, is to exploit compositionally. Let me explain what that means. So for example, let's say that you're fitting an energy-based model to a big collection of images of people's faces, okay? So you have this large data set of face images and you fit an energy-based model to them. What you can do is to select some subset of the images, let's say images of children, and fit one model to those, okay? Let's call that use of one. Now remember that high probability means low energy. So if you are fitting a model use of one to images of children's faces, what that means is that U one of x is low if x is a child's face. So you fit one energy-based function to child faces. Let's say you fit another energy-based function to smiling faces. Let's call that U2 of x. So U2 of x is low if x is a smiling face and so on, you do a few of these. Now let's say you want to generate the face of a smiling child. How do you do that? Easy, you use U1 of x plus U2 of x as your energy-based function and you sample from it, and this gives you a smiling child. So energy-based functions really enable compositionally of this type. Okay, so we saw all these wonderful pictures. How do you sample from one of these models? How do you sample from a model like this where you don't even have the normalization factor? Well, we've seen that one of the things you can do is Gibbs sampling and that's most suitable when the variables are discreet. So this is most suitable when the individual variables, say the pixels, have discrete values. But often we are dealing with continuous variables and in those settings, there's an alternative sampling method called Langevin sampling that works rather well. So the way it works, if you wanna sample from a distribution like this, is you start with any old x. So you start with any old x, say any old image, and now you randomly tweak it and then you randomly tweak it again, and you do this over and over again. And at some point you stop and generate that image. You stop and output that image and it turns out that it's a random sample from the desired distribution. So at a high level, this sounds a lot like Gibbs sampling, but the details are very different. So the random tweaking step takes the current x, say the current image, and first, takes a gradient step in the direction of lower energy, and then it adds in some random noise. So this operation is repeated over and over again and then at some point, you stop the process and output x, and that's a random sample from the distribution. So like the Gibbs sampler, this is a very simple and convenient operation and it turns out that it is guaranteed to get close to the target distribution. So if you look at it, in fact, it looks like a sampling version of gradient descent. Okay, so we can sample from energy-based models using either Gibbs sampling or Langevin sampling, but how do we actually learn these models? If we have a collection of images say, how do we fit a model to this collection? So let's say that we're gonna represent our energy function by a neural net, okay? And let theta denote the parameters or weights of the neural net, okay? So we are gonna learn theta. Once we've chosen some weights, the distribution we get is the distribution corresponding to energy function use of theta which is this distribution over here. It's the distribution that's proportional to e to the minus U sub theta, and here we've thrown in the normalizing factor, and the normalizing factor is simply this integral, the thing we need to divide by to make sure that we have a valid distribution. Now unfortunately what we've also made clear is that this normalizing factor is beyond our reach. We are never going to know what it is. Okay, so this is the kind of model that we are dealing with. We want to learn one of these models. So we have a bunch of data, say a collection of images, and we want to find an energy function, U theta, we wanna find the weights theta, that will maximize the log likelihood of our data, okay? So this is the sum over all the data points of the log of that data point. So the log probability of the first data point, plus the log probability of the second data point and so on. So all we wanna do is to find a model theta that maximizes this log likelihood, the same thing that we've done many, many times before. Can we do this? Well, one difficulty here is that we wanna maximize the log probabilities, but we don't have the probabilities. In order to get actual probabilities, we need to know the normalizing factor. And that's not something we can really know, and so this whole enterprise seems doomed from the start. Fortunately there's a way around this. So let's say that we are gonna use gradient ascent to maximize this function. In that case, all we really need to know is not the actual probabilities, but the derivative of the log likelihood, okay? That's what we actually need in order to do gradient ascent, and it turns out that there is an expression for it that allows us to circumvent the normalizing factor. Here's the expression, the derivative of the log likelihood is the negative gradient of the energy at the current parameter theta, plus the expected gradient of the energy at a point chosen at random from the current model e sub theta, okay? So let's see, how can we use this? Let's look at this first term. So what's your theta? Well, that's just our neural net, we have that. How do we get its derivative? Well, we just use the auto-differentiation capabilities of neural net packages, so we get the derivative as well, not a problem. Now let's look at the second part, okay? So again, we have this, but now we want the expected value of this over x chosen at random from our current model p theta. Well, one thing we can do from our current model is to sample. We've seen two strategies for that already, the Gibbs sampler and the Langevin sampler. So we can sample a whole bunch of xs from our current model and then simply evaluate the gradient of the energy function at those xs, and that gives us an excellent approximation to this expected value. So this is something we can compute and this lets us do gradient ascent in order to find the maximum likelihood solution. Okay, so why does this formula hold? I have the derivation for it over here. It's really very straightforward. You're welcome to stare at it briefly. I'm not gonna go through the details, but what I wanted to do is to just step back and see where we've come. We've now talked about some really powerful and expressive distributions, Markov random fields, and even more general energy-based models. In all of this, we've seen that the key primitive that enables us to use these distributions is sampling. That is really the central critical operation and what we'll be doing next therefore is to look at sampling a little bit more closely. 