(lively music) (screen whooshing) - A Markov random field is a convenient way of specifying an arbitrarily complex joint distribution over many random variables. Once we have a distribution of this type, we often want to do inference with it to answer various types of queries. How do we do this? So let's begin by briefly recalling the formalism of Markov random fields. So we have some joint distribution over multiple random variables, say X1 through Xn, and a Markov random field specifies this distribution using two things. First of all, there's an undirected graph, which has a node for each of the random variables and has edges representing dependencies between the variables. The precise functional form of the distribution is then this. The joint distribution of a configuration X1 through Xn is the product of a bunch of local terms, one for each of the maximal clicks in the graph. So for each maximal click in the graph, there is a local function called a click potential that depends only on the variables inside that click. The joint probability of X1 through Xn is the product of each of these local click potentials. And then there's a normalizing factor in the front. Now, one of the things that we've emphasized is that in small examples, we might be able to figure out this normalizing factor, but in general, it is going to be rather difficult and that's going to be a key consideration in performing inference. How can we do inference without the normalizing factor? In particular, without the normalizing factor, we cannot even obtain the concrete probability of a specific configuration. Okay, so now let's look at our three types of inference queries. We discussed these earlier when we were talking about Bayes nets. So in general, the way inference goes is that we have values for some of the variables, let's say X sub E and we call this the evidence, okay? So X sub E doesn't have to be a single variable. It might be a collection of say, 10 or 20 variables but these are the variables whose values we've observed and their values are the following. Now, based on these observations, we wanna figure out what the other variables are and there are several forms that the query can take. In a conditional probability query, there are some other variables, S, that we're interested in. And what we wanna know is given the evidence, what is the distribution on those other variables? A second type of query is called most probable explanation. And what it says is that given the evidence, what is the highest probability way to fill in the remaining variables? What is the most likely configuration of all the unobserved variables? And a third type of query is maximum a posteriori, where once again, we have our evidence, we have the variables we've seen and now we want to infer the values of some other variables, not necessarily all of the unobserved variables. We have some subset S of variables that we care about and we wanna find the most likely setting of those variables. So it's a more general form of the most probable explanation. Now, it turns out that the landscape of these three queries is very similar to the landscape that we saw when we studied Bayes nets. All three types of queries are NP-hard when we are dealing with distributions that are Markov random fields. What that means is that we don't have algorithms that are both efficient and always give the exact correct answer. However, we do have algorithms that are efficient and give the correct answer for special types of graphs, when the graph is a tree, or more generally, when the undirected graph has bounded tree-width. Now, for other graphs, instead of getting the exact correct answer, we do have approximate inference algorithms. And these are based on sampling, variational methods, belief propagation, and a few other methodologies. Out of these, probably the most important is sampling. And so let's turn to that now. It turns out that we can sample from a Markov random field. So let's say we have a distribution, a joint distribution that is a Markov random field. We have algorithms that can sample from the distribution. In other words, that can generate a configuration X1 through Xn at random from this distribution. We also have algorithms that can obtain conditional samples. So you fix some of the variables, the ones you've observed, you clamp the evidence and now you wanna sample the remaining variables conditioned on the ones that are clamped. This notation over here means all variables other than E. So all variables other than the ones in E. Now, it's a little surprising perhaps that we can do this given that in the absence of the normalizing factor, we don't even have the ability to obtain the probability for a specific configuration. Nonetheless, we can sample and we'll see how. But does this help us answer queries? Well, let's see. Suppose we want to do a conditional probability query. So suppose there's some variable we're interested in and we wanna know the distribution of that variable given our evidence, given the variables that we've actually observed. Can we solve this using sampling? Yes, we can. What we should do is generate a whole bunch of samples of the remaining variables, okay? So generate many samples of the remaining variables X given the clamped variables. And in those samples, look at the distribution of X sub i. This is an excellent approximation to the query we wanna answer. So we can answer conditional probability queries using sampling. What about maximum a posteriori? We clamp some of the variables, and now we want to obtain the most likely setting of some other variables. Can we do this? It turns out that there are methods for doing this. For example, simulated annealing. Unfortunately, we won't be able to go into the details but the key point is that sampling is a very powerful operation. We can use it to answer other types of queries. So how do we sample? There are several different sampling strategies that we'll be talking about, but let's start with a relatively simple strategy called the Gibbs sampler. So here's how it works. Let's say that we have a distribution P, say these vectors with n features, n coordinates. The way we're gonna sample from this distribution is that we start with any old vector X. So we start with some arbitrary vector X and now what we're gonna do is to make random tweaks to X. So we take our current vector and we randomly tweak it and then we tweak it again, and then we tweak it again and we do lots and lots of these random tweaks. At some point, we stop and we just output our current X. And it turns out that if we set up the tweaks carefully, the final X that we output will, in fact, be a random sample from the desired distribution phi. So what is this tweaking process? So as before, we start with any old X. We start with any old vector and now we repeatedly perform this step. We pick a feature and now we're gonna change just that feature. And the way we're gonna change it is by resampling the value of that one feature from its conditional distribution while keeping the other features fixed. So what this means is fix all features other than Xi. So we pick a feature at random and now we re-sample the value of that feature from its conditional distribution while keeping all the other features fixed. And that's one little tweak to our X. And we do this tweak again and again. We keep picking a feature at random and changing the value of that feature. We do this repeatedly, and at some point, we stop and output X. Okay, so what does this resampling step look like in practice? So let's say, for example, that our variables are binary, that they have value zero and one. So on each step, we pick a feature. Let's say we pick feature i and what we're gonna do is to just re-sample X sub i. So we're either gonna set X sub i to zero or to one and we're gonna set it to one with probability with the correct conditional probability, which is the following. It's the joint probability that Xi is one and the remaining features are clamped to their current values divided by the joint probability that Xi is zero and the remaining features are clamped, plus the joint probability that Xi is one and the remaining features are clamped. So we set Xi to one at random, but with this probability. And the key point here is that when we're dealing with a Markov random field and we don't know the normalizing factor, we cannot compute the numerator just by itself because it's got the normalizing factor in there but the same normalizing factor appears in both the numerator and the denominator. And so it cancels out. We don't need to know Z to compute this ratio. And so in fact, it is very easy to compute this probability and therefore, to re-sample that particular coordinate. So we do this over and over again and it turns out that X is guaranteed to converge to the correct distribution. This is a simple four-line procedure for sampling from an arbitrary Markov random field. Let's look at a slightly different way of conceptualizing the Gibbs sampler. So we have some space from which we are sampling, let's call it script X, and we want to sample from some distribution over this space, some distribution P and this is a high dimensional space. So we begin by choosing any old point. That's our starting point. And now in the first step, we randomly tweak that point. We pick a coordinate at random, and then we re-sample the value of that coordinate. So after one step, there's several places we could be, perhaps we could be in any of these places, and perhaps we end up in this one. Now we do our second step. And again, there's several places it might lead, okay? Because we're picking a coordinate at random and then resampling its value. And we keep going in this way. And you can see that after a few steps, we could be just about anywhere and after a lot of steps, we'll essentially be anywhere in the space. And it turns out that the distribution of where we are will be the correct distribution P. So this is really a simple and remarkable way of sampling from a possibly complex distribution. Now, a Markov random field is something of this form. It'll be useful to sometimes rewrite it in a slightly different form, to rewrite it like this. So we have the normalizing factor, but now everything's in the exponent. How do we take this and move it into the exponent? Easy. We'll just do the log. So this function, U of X, is just since there's a minus, we'll take the negative log of the expression we had before. And the log of a product is the sum of the logs. So this is just the negative of the sum overall clicks of the log of the click potential. So we can easily rewrite a Markov random field in this form, and a distribution that's in this form is called an energy-based model. And this term up here is called the energy function. This is jargon from physics. So when we have low energy, when this is a small value, we have high probability. So low energy corresponds to high probability. So what we've seen is that any Markov random field can easily be rewritten as an energy-based model. Energy-based models are more general than Markov random fields. So we've said that the Gibbs sampler can be used for Markov random fields, but if you think about it, you can see that it can also be used for any energy-based model as long as the variables are discrete. In cases where the variables are continuous, we'll find some other sampling methods that are effective. So what we are gonna see increasingly is that sampling is one of the key primitives in probabilistic AI. So far, we just talked a little bit about sampling but we are going to delve into it soon in a lot more detail. 