(uplifting instrumental music) (music booming) (visual transition swooshing) - Welcome back, everybody. So in this second part of the course, our theme has been modeling data using probability distributions, that is fitting distributions to data. We began with the simplest distributions for one dimensional data, distributions like the Gaussian and the Poisson. Then we moved on to higher dimensional data where we began with the multi-variate Gaussian. Most recently we've looked at Bayes' nets, which use directed graphs to represent distributions of arbitrary complexity. Bayes' nets are sometimes called directed graphical models. We'll now turn to undirected graphical models, which are more commonly known as Markov random fields. So as usual, let's begin with an example from the classic textbook by Judea Pearl. In this example, there are four people, two men and two women, and these people occasionally meet in pairs, one man and one woman. There's also a disease going around. So for each of the people we define a binary random variable that represents whether or not they have the disease. So we have four random variables, F1 and F2 for the women, and M1 and M2 for the men. And each of these takes on value zero or one, no disease or disease. We are interested in modeling the joint distribution over these four random variables. Now on the right over here we have a graph that captures the interactions between the people. So the first man, for example, occasionally meets with the first woman, and occasionally meets with the second woman. So this is an interaction graph, but in this case the dependencies between the random variables arise solely from these interactions. So this is also a dependency graph. Now, what we are interested in is the joint distribution over these four random variables. This could be anything, but we say that the joint distribution factors over this graph, if it has this functional form, if the joint distribution can be written in this way. Let's see what this is saying. What it's saying is that the probability of any configuration, F1, F2, M1, M2 is the product of four terms. The first term only involves F1 and M1. It only involves these two variables. The second term only involves F1 and M2. The third term only involves F2 and M1, and the fourth term only involves F2 and M2. Now, each of these terms is a function just of that pair of random variables. So we are gonna call them Psi11, Psi12, Psi21, Psi22. And these are arbitrary functions. The only thing that we require is that these functions have positive values. Other than that, they could be anything. Now, in order for this to be a valid probability distribution, we do need the probabilities of all the configurations to add up to one, and because of that, we have this normalizing factor in the front, okay? So the only purpose of that is to make sure that everything adds up to one. So what this functional form is saying is that the distribution does not have arbitrary dependencies. In fact, the probability of any configuration, F1, F2, M1, M2 can be obtained just by looking at pairs of random variables, the pairs that interact. There are no dependencies beyond this. So that sounds intuitive, but what are these functions exactly? What are these Psi11, Psi12, and so on? Let's look at an example. So here's an example of what these functions might be. So we have four functions. One for F1 M1, and functions for each of the other edges as well. So let's focus on this particular function, Psi11. It's a function of F1 and M1, and F1 and M1 are both binary. So they each take on value zero and one, which means that the function can be specified with a little table like this. A table that simply enumerates the four possible configurations of the inputs F1 and M1. And for each of those configurations it gives the function value. Now, notice that these function values don't add up to one, or anything like that. They're pretty arbitrary numbers. The important thing is just that they are positive, okay, so that's the first function, what we call the first clique potential. Likewise, the other functions might look like this. Each of them can be captured by a small table. Now, what is the probability of a particular configuration? So let's say that we are interested in a configuration like this, the probability that, let's say, everybody has the disease except the second man. So the probability that they're all one except for M2, which is zero. What is the probability of that? Well, we'll just plug into this formula. It's one over the normalizing factor, times Psi11 of F1, M1. So that's this entry over here. So 50 times Psi12 of F1, M2. So that's this entry over here, 20. Psi21 of F2, M1. So that's this entry over here, (clicking) and Psi22 of F2, M2, which is this entry over here. That's the probability of that particular configuration. Now, notice that in order to get a concrete probability we really need this normalizing factor. We need to know what it is. What is it? So here I've made a large table, containing all possible configurations of the four random variables. Since they're Boolean, since they each take on just two possible values, the total number of possible configurations is two times two times two times two, which is 16, which isn't too much. And so I've just made a big table, and for each configuration, I've written down the product of the values of the four functions. The normalizing factor is the sum of these. (clicking) If we divide by this normalizing factor we get legitimate probabilities. Now, in this case the normalizing factor is not that hard to figure out because the total number of configurations is only 16. But in more general scenarios, where there are lots more random variables, or where the random variables take on more values, where they're not just binary, the number of configurations could be truly enormous, could be exponentially large. In such cases, it will be really hard to determine the normalizing factor, and that's a problem that we are gonna have to grapple with. But in the meantime, is there anything we can do without knowing the normalizing factor? It turns out there's actually plenty we can do without knowing Z. For example, we can figure out the most likely configuration. The most likely configuration is simply the largest number in this table, which is this one. It is the configuration where nobody has the disease. Okay. Now that we have looked at a brief example let's go back and define Markov random fields a little bit more formally. So Markov random fields are a way of representing a joint distribution over multiple random variables with the help of a graph. Hmm, that sounds a lot like Bayes' nets. Yes, but the difference is that now we use undirected graphs, rather than directed graphs. Let's say for example, that we have five random variables, and we want to capture the joint distribution over these variables. So the first thing we do is to draw a graph that captures interactions or dependencies between the variables. Once we have this graph, it immediately tells us the functional form of the distribution. It tells us that the distribution must look like this. Where do we get this from? Where is this functional form coming from? How do we go from the graph to this particular functional form? The way we do that is by looking at maximal cliques in the graph. Now, a clique is a collection of nodes that are fully connected that have all possible edges between them. So for example, the click, examples of cliques in this graph are X1, X2, and X3. (clicking) This is a clique because we have three nodes and all possible edges between them are present. Okay, what about X1, (clicking) X3, and X4? (clicking) Is that a click? No, it's not a click because there's no edge between X1 and X4. So this doesn't count as a click. Okay? So one of the cliques is X1, X2, and X3, and moreover, it's a maximal click. What that means is that we cannot add to it. There is no extra node we can add to that, while retaining the clique property. So that's one of the maximal cliques in the graph. What are the other maximal cliques? Well, X4 and X5, just by themselves. This pair are a maximal click. There's only one possible edge between them that edge is present, and there is nothing we can add to those two while still retaining the clique property. So that's another maximal click. As is X2, X5. (clicking) Okay, this edge. And X3, X4. (clicking) This edge. And in fact these are the only maximal cliques in the graph. This graph has four maximal cliques. Now, that tells us that the functional form of the distribution looks like this. (clicking) It is the product of four terms, one for each of the cliques. So there's a term for one, two, three, which only involves the variables in that click. There's a second function that only involves the variables in this click. Another function that only involves the variables in this click, and another function that only involves the variables in that click. Now, these functions can be completely arbitrary, except that they must be positive. And in order to get a legitimate probability distribution, we need this normalizing factor in the beginning to make sure that everything adds up to one. Now, this is just an example with five variables. More generally, we'll have a distribution over N variables. And in order to do that, we begin with an undirected graph with nodes for each of the variables and where the edges represent dependencies between variables. Once we have the graph, a distribution that factors over this graph is a distribution that has this functional form, where the probability of any configuration is given by a product of functions, one for each click. So let's see, be one of the cliques in the graph. So let's see, be a maximal clique in the graph. (clicking) There is a function for each such maximal click, and is it is a function of only the variables in that click. The function only looks at the nodes inside that click. We will sometimes use X sub c as a shorthand for these variables. X sub c is all variables Xi that lie inside that clique. Okay, so a distribution factors over the graph, if it can be expressed as a product of functions one for each maximal clique in the graph. These functions are called clique potentials. They're allowed to be arbitrary, except that they must be positive, and then we have a normalizing factor in the front. What this tells us is that the joint distribution over the end variables is not arbitrary. The dependencies between the variables are not arbitrary. The joint distribution is a product of local terms. Each term corresponds to a clique, a bunch of fully interacting random variables, and we can get the full probability of a configuration by just looking at these local terms, and multiplying them together. Okay? So that's the formalism of the Markov random field. Next time, we'll look more closely at some properties of these models. 