(gentle music) - Welcome back. We've been talking about modeling a data set by fitting a probability distribution to it. This is known as generative modeling, and it's one of the most successful types of unsupervised learning. For instance, generative modeling is the basis of the current generation of large language models. Now once we have a generative model, one of the most basic things we want to do with it is to sample from the distribution. But it's not obvious how to do this, especially if the distribution is complex or high dimensional. It turns out that a great way to sample from a complex distribution is by doing a random walk. So we'll be talking about two sampling strategies, the Gibbs sampler and the Langevin sampler. These are quite different actually, but they follow the same high-level paradigm. They both sample from a high-dimensional distribution by doing a random walk. Here's the setup. We want a sample from some distribution P and this is a distribution over some potentially very large space, script X. Sometimes the space is discreet. So for instance, let's say that we are dealing with binarized images on N pixels. Then X is the space of all such images. So we have N pixels. Each pixel is binary, either zero or one. So the space of all these images is 0,1 to the N. Other times, X could be a continuous space like R to the D. So we have this very large space X and we have some distribution P on this space, and we want to sample from the distribution. Now, why might this be difficult? Well, the two basic and very significant difficulties. The first is that typically X is huge, maybe even infinite. This means that we can't just enumerate all of the outcomes in X along with their probabilities and then just choose from that list. For instance, let's say we are dealing with binary images on N pixels. Even for a modest value of N, like N equals 100, this space has sized two to the 100, which is astronomically large. Okay, so that's the first problem. The second problem is that in many cases, we can't even evaluate the density or probability explicitly at any specific point X. This is because there's often an unknown normalizing factor like we saw with energy-based models. So for a given X, we can't even get its exact probability, P of X, but what we can do is to get ratios of the probabilities of two different points, X and X prime. And we can do this because when we are looking at the ratio, the normalizing factor cancels that. So these are significant difficulties. We are sampling over a truly enormous space, and for any given point in this space, we can't even get the exact probability or the exact density. It turns out that one way to get around these difficulties is to sample by doing a random walk on the space X. And let's see what this means at a high level. Okay, so we have some truly enormous space, script X, and we have some distribution P on this space and P is often a rather complex distribution. The way we sample is as follows. We start at any given location in this space. We choose any X in this space and that's our starting point, and then we do a random walk starting at X. So in the first step of the walk, we move to a point near X, maybe we'll move here. And in the second step of the walk, we moved to another nearby point, and then another nearby point, and then another nearby point and so on. Now, at the outset, we knew exactly where we were. We knew that we were at X. But after one step of the walk, there was already a little bit of uncertainty. And after two steps, there was an even larger set of possible locations where we could be. And after doing this for a long time, we could be anywhere in X. We are gonna set up the random walk so that after doing many steps, the distribution of where we are is in fact the distribution P. And so we'll do this random walk for many steps and then stop and output our current location. And it turns out that that will be a random sample from the desired distribution P. So this is a pretty ingenious setup. We've seen what we are doing at a high level. And next time, we'll get into a few more of the details. 