(lively music) - We'll now move on to a different sampling strategy called the Langevin sampler. This is based on a rather different type of random walk. So in understanding Langevin sampling, a key concept is Brownian motion. Brownian motion refers to the way that particles in a gas or liquid appear to perform a random walk. It's named after the botanist Robert Brown, who looked at little pieces of pollen suspended in water under a microscope and he noted that they perform a continual swarming motion. Brownian motion is a mathematical model of this kind of movement. It's a mathematical model of a continuous random walk. So in understanding this model, let B sub t denote the position at time t and let's say that we start at zero. Okay, so here's the time axis. We start at zero, and now let's look at any two times, s and t. So time s, let's say that's our position, at time t, let's say that's our position. The property, the key property of Brownian motion is that this change, which is B sub t minus B sub s is independent of where the particle was at time s, is independent of B sub s. So the magnitude of the change doesn't depend on B sub s, and moreover, it has a Gaussian distribution. Now, it turns out that the random walk looks something like this. This is the canonical continuous random walk and it's been used to model everything from particles in a gas to the stock market. Okay, so with that in mind, let's move back to our sampling problem. So let's say that we have an energy-based model. We have some distribution over a high dimensional space and the distribution looks something like this. It's an energy-based model and there's some normalization factor in the front that we don't know and that we will never know. There is a continuous random walk that converges to exactly this distribution. It's a random walk known as the Langevin diffusion. So let X sub t be the position of this random walk at time t. X sub t is some position in Rd. Now, the random walk evolves according to this stochastic differential equation. What happens is that at time t, the change in its position is, first of all, in the negative direction of the derivative of U. In other words, it's a change that tends to reduce U to reduce the energy and therefore, to increase the probability. And then there's also a noise term, which is the Brownian motion. So this continuous process turns out to converge to exactly the distribution P. And this is great because nowhere in this process do we see the normalizing factor. So we now have a continuous random walk that converges to exactly the distribution we want P. And so we can imagine performing this random walk for a certain amount of time, stopping and then outputting our current position and that would be a draw from P. The problem is that this is a continuous process. How can we simulate this on a computer where we absolutely need discrete time updates? Well, there are several standard ways of discretized stochastic differential equations. One of them is the Euler-Maruyama scheme and when we apply that to the Langevin diffusion, we get this discrete random walk. So let X sub t be the position at time t. To get the position at time t plus one, what we do is we take X sub t, we subtract off the derivative of the energy at X sub t, so the derivative of the current energy. Remember, this tends to reduce the energy, which is to increase the probability, times some step size. And then we add in Gaussian noise, again times some term involving the step size. So this is the discretization of the Langevin dynamics and this is something we can actually do on a computer. The question is does this discretized version also converge to the distribution P? And it turns out that it doesn't quite but it's close enough and therefore, it's widely used. So the way the Langevin sampler works is to sample from an energy-based model by doing this kind of random walk, start in arbitrary position X, and then perform a random walk according to this scheme, to run the random walk for a little while and stop and output the current location. And that is a random draw from a distribution that might not be exactly P but is close enough. This is a very popular sampling scheme in machine learning. So let's end with a few historical footnotes. So first, a little bit about the Gibbs sampler. This is a wonderfully simple sampling strategy. It was introduced into statistics and machine learning by Geman and Geman in a paper that we talked about earlier when we were studying energy-based models. So what they did was to actually simply adopt a sampling strategy that was well known from statistical physics where it's called the Glauber dynamics. And they had the insight that this same sampling strategy could be very valuable in statistics and machine learning. A few years later, two statisticians, Gelfand and Smith, went in and really cleaned up a lot of the mathematical foundations of this sampling method. The second method we described is the Langevin sampler and that's based on the Langevin equations, which were developed at the turn of the 20th century by Paul Langevin. He was looking at how a system evolves under a combination of deterministic and random forces. In the early '90s, Grenander and Miller introduced this idea into statistics in machine learning. They pointed out that this continuous random walk could be discretized and used to sample from high dimensional distributions. In that same journal, a statistician pointed out that this random walk doesn't converge exactly to the desired target distribution and suggested some ways in which it could be tweaked to make that convergence happen. So in both these cases, we see that these sampling methods have a long history and are based on results in physics. So these are methods that have really withstood the test of time, and their use in statistics in machine learning is just increasing with each passing day. 