(light electronic music) (air whooshing) - Welcome back. The Gibbs sampler is a general and wonderfully simple way of sampling from a high-dimensional distribution. Let's see how it works. So let's say that we wanna sample from some distribution, P, on a high-dimensional space, script X. Let's say, for example, that X is an N-dimensional space. So here's the Gibbs sampler in a nutshell. We start at any old location in the space. And then we do a random walk for many steps. And we stop and output our current position. Each step of the random walk looks like this. We start by picking a coordinate at random. So in our case, there are N features, N coordinates, so we pick i at random from one to N. And then what we do is that we just resample the ith coordinate while keeping all the other values fixed. So we look at our current position in the space. We pick a coordinate at random. And we just change the value at that coordinate while keeping everything else fixed. So we resample the ith coordinate, x sub i, from its conditional distribution while keeping all the remaining coordinates, these are the N minus one remaining coordinates, so the N minus one coordinates other than i, we keep those fixed and resample just the ith coordinate. So this is a random walk where, in each step of the walk, only one coordinate of x changes. So we make many, many steps, and then we stop and output our current position. And it turns out that that's a random draw from the target distribution, P. Now, that sounds almost too good to be true. Why does this work? Well, we're not gonna go into the mathematical details of this, but I've just put down a brief outline over here. And if you like, you can check these on your own. So the first thing we need to check is that this random walk just has one stationary distribution. In order to do this, what we need to do is to find some number of steps k such that it's possible to go from any point in the space to any other point within k steps. So here's a little hint for you. k is equal to capital N. Under the random walk of the Gibbs sampler, we can go from any location to any other location in N steps, changing one coordinate at a time. The second thing we need to check is that not only is there just one stationary distribution, but it's the correct distribution, it's exactly the distribution P that we want. And in order to do that, we need to check this detailed balance condition. That for any locations x and x prime, P of x times the probability of moving from x to x prime in a single step is the same as P of x prime times the probability of moving from x prime to x in a single step. And that's something that can be checked quite easily for this specific random walk. Okay, so that's the Gibbs sampler. Now, let's see it at work in a particular generative model. And this is a very famous model called the Ising model. So the Ising model is a distribution over N-dimensional vectors where each entry is either minus one or plus one. So it's a distribution over the space minus one, plus one to the N, okay? So each location in the space is an N-dimensional vector consisting of minus ones and plus ones. Now, the distribution we wanna sample from is an energy-based model where the probability of any vector x is proportional to e to the minus energy function of x for this particular energy function over here. Notice that there is some normalizing factor in here that we are not gonna be able to compute. Now, this model comes from statistical physics, where each of the xi's corresponds to a particle in a lattice. So we have a system of N particles that are arranged in a lattice. Maybe this one is x1, maybe this one is x2, maybe this one is x3, and so on. And each particle either has an upward spin, in which case its value is plus one, or it has a downward spin, in which case its value is minus one. And so the state of all N particles, the configuration of these N particles, is given by a vector, minus one, plus one to the N. Now, the energy function encourages neighboring particles to have the same spin, okay? So let's look at it a little bit more closely. So we're gonna have some undirected graph on the N features, x1 through xN. In the physics example, the undirected graph is simply this lattice graph over here. But more generally, it could be anything, okay? So the first term in the energy function looks at neighboring features in the graph. This J sub ij is a weight. You can think of it as some positive number. And so this term encourages these neighboring features, xi and xj, to have the same value. Because when they have the same value, this is positive. And so the energy is reduced. And remember, low energy means high probability. So the first term encourages neighboring features to have the same value. This is a lot like the image example we looked at earlier, where we constructed an image-based energy-based model where neighboring pixels were encouraged to have similar values. Now, what about the second term? Well, let's see. If beta sub i is greater than zero, that encourages x sub i to be plus one. Because if that's the case, then the energy is reduced. And so the probability goes up. Likewise, if beta i is less than zero, that encourages x sub i to be minus one. Okay, so that's our energy function. It's an intuitive energy function. And the overall model is called the Ising model. This is the distribution we wanna sample from. Now, N is potentially quite large. So this is a distribution over high-dimensional vectors. How can we sample from this complex, high-dimensional distribution? Well, let's go ahead and design a Gibbs sampler for this problem. So in the Gibbs sampler, we'll start at any old position x, and then we'll do a random walk starting at x. Now, in each step of the random walk, let's say our current position is x1 through xN. In one step of the random walk, we'll choose a coordinate at random and just resample that one coordinate, okay? So we pick a coordinate at random. Let's say we pick coordinate k. And we resample its value. We're gonna set it to either minus one or plus one. We're gonna resample its value, conditional on keeping all the remaining N minus one coordinates fixed. So how do we do this? What is the probability that we're gonna set this coordinate to plus one, given the values of the remaining coordinates? Well, let's see. This is equal to the joint probability that that coordinate is plus one and the remaining coordinates keep their current values divided by the joint probability that that coordinate is plus one and the remaining coordinates keep their values plus the probability that that coordinate is minus one and the remaining coordinates keep their values. So when we resample X sub k, we have to resample it according to this distribution. But what are these things? What is this joint probability, for example? Well, let's just go ahead and write it out. What is the probability that X sub k is plus one while all the remaining coordinates retain their current values? Well, we can just read it off from here. It's equal to, well, there's some normalizing factor in the energy-based model. We don't know what it is, so hopefully it's gonna go away at some point. And then, we do e to the minus the energy function. So it's e, I'm just gonna write it as exponent, and then minus this energy function over here, okay. And for this energy function, what I'm gonna do is to separate out the terms that involve k and the terms that don't involve k, okay? So let's start with this first summation. So we have the terms that, first the terms that involve k. So we have J sub kj x sub j. And here, x sub k equals one, okay? And now let's look at the remaining terms. Sorry, this is a minus over here. Sum over all ij J sub ij, and these are the ones that are not equal to k, J sub ij xi xj. No let's move on to this term over here. There's one term that involves k. That is a negative beta sub k. And now let's look at the remaining terms that don't involve k. Okay. And similarly, we can do the case where Xk equals minus one. Okay. And so we get one over z, exponent, and now, again, we separate out the terms that involve k and the terms that don't involve k. So let's first look at the terms that involve k. And now, because X sub k is a minus one, the polarity of this changes, okay, and then we get the terms that don't involve k. And now we do the second part of the summation. Okay. So now that we have these two expressions, we can plug into this formula over here. And we can see that, in fact, a lot of things are gonna cancel out. So the zs will cancel out. And in fact, these terms will cancel out, the terms that don't involve k. And so what we're gonna be left with is something of the form e to some delta over e to the delta plus e to the minus delta, where delta is simply this term. It's simply these terms over here, the k terms. Okay. So we actually know how to resample the value of that specific coordinate, X sub k. And there's a nice simple formula for it. So let's put this all together. So recall we're sampling from this distribution over here, where U of x is equal to the sum over ij Jij xi xj minus beta i xi. We wanna sample from this distribution. Our Gibbs sampler looks like this. So we start at any old position. We start at any x in this space. And now we do many steps of the random walk. So repeat many times. What does each step of the random walk look like? Well, we choose one coordinate, and we just update that one coordinate. We resample just that one coordinate. So choose k in the range one to N at random. Now we compute the value delta that we talked about earlier, which is the sum over all j of Jjk x sub j plus beta k. With probability e to the delta over e to the delta plus e to the minus delta, set xk to plus one. Else, set xk to minus one. So we update that one coordinate. And after many steps of this random walk, we halt and output x. So that's it. These five lines of code generate a random sample from this very complex, high-dimensional distribution. Okay, so at the end of the day, the Gibbs sampler is very simple indeed. And that's the beauty of this method of sampling. 