(bright music) - How do we sample from a high dimensional generative model? The way we do it is by random walk. Let's look at some of the mathematics behind this. So here's the setup. We have some distribution "P" that we want to sample from and this is a distribution over a space, "script X," that is potentially enormous. So there's some very, very large space: script X and there's a distribution over this space and we want to sample from the distribution. The way we are gonna do this is by starting at some specific point in this space. It doesn't matter where. And then doing a random walk. So in the first step of the walk, we'll move to a neighboring location, maybe this one. Then we'll take another step, moving to another neighboring location chosen at random, and then another step, another neighboring location chosen at random, and so on. And we'll do this for quite a while. The random walk will be set up so that after many steps, the distribution of where we are in the space is exactly the target distribution P. And so all we need to do is to do this random walk for many steps, and then stop and output our current location. And that will be a random draw from the distribution P. Okay, so let's see how this works out mathematically. Now, the space, X, that we are sampling from could be a discreet space or a continuous space. The simplest case is when X is a discreet case. And so let's focus on that situation. Okay, so let's say X is discreet and that it's a finite space, although it might be very large, and typically is. So we are doing this random walk. And let Q sub T be our position at time T. Now, at time zero, we know exactly where we are, but at time one there's already some uncertainty in our location. And as time goes on, there are lots of different places we could be. So our position at time T is a random variable. Q sub T is a random variable. And our next position at time T plus one is Q sub T plus one. How is Q sub T plus one related to Q sub T? Well, in order to get from Q sub T to Q sub T plus one, we've done one step of the random walk. So we are gonna summarize the random walk by a transition matrix. This is a very large matrix, a matrix of size script X by script X. So it's a huge matrix. And in this matrix the entry XX prime is simply the probability of moving from X to X prime in a single step. So it's the probability that in one step of the random walk we move from X to X prime. To write it down a little bit more formally, what we are saying is that if our position at time T is X, then the probability that we are at X prime at time T plus one is M X X prime. Okay? So it's the probability that in a single step from time T to time T plus one, we move from X to X prime. Now we have to move somewhere in that single step. And so it must be the case that these probabilities, starting at position X, add up to one. Okay, so if we are at position X, then in the next step we're gonna go to some X prime. It's gonna be with probability M X X prime and these probabilities have to add up to one. So the entire random walk is captured by this very large transition matrix. Okay. Now, Q sub T is our position at time T. And there are lots of different places we could be at time T Let pi sub T be the distribution over where we are at time T. So pi sub T is a distribution over the entire space script X. It's the distribution of our location after T steps of the random walk. Now, what is the relationship between the distribution at time T and the distribution at time T plus one? How does this distribution evolve in a single step of the random walk? Well, let's see. So at time T plus one, the probability that we are at location X is by T plus one X. Okay? So this is the probability that our position at time T plus one, QT plus one, is equal to X. And what is that probability? Well, let's look at all the places we could have been at time T. Okay? So let X prime be our position at time T. This is the probability that we were at X prime at time T. And this is the probability that in a single step we moved from X prime to X. So when we write this out more simply, we see that the distribution at time T plus one is just the distribution at time T times M. So the distribution changes in a very simple way. At each time step, the distribution just gets multiplied by the transition matrix M. Now, this T over here means transpose. The distribution at time T is a very tall vector. It's a vector with script X entries, okay? Because these are all the places we could be at time T, there's script X possibilities. When we take the transpose, it becomes a row vector. So we make it horizontal. Okay. So the dynamics of the random walk is captured by this transition matrix. Now, when we do the walk for many steps, it turns out that the distribution of where we are stops changing, okay? So that the distribution at time T plus one is actually the same as the distribution at time T. And when we get to that kind of equilibrium, it's called the stationary distribution. So we end up in some distribution that is unchanged by further steps of the random walk. In other words, a distribution for which this is true: when you multiply it by M, you are still in the same distribution. And this is called a stationary distribution. When we do a random walk, we ultimately converge to a stationary distribution. Okay. So this has all been very abstract. Let's look at a very concrete example. So let's say we have a very simple outcome space with just two outcomes, one and two. Now the random walk on this space is given by this simple diagram. This says that when we're at location one, we stay there with probability three quarters. And we move to location two with probability a quarter. Meanwhile, if we are at location two, then a single step of the random walk will remain there with probability a half or move to one with probability a half. What is the transition matrix that corresponds to this random walk? Well, since there are two possible outcomes since our space has size two, the transition matrix is a two by two matrix. So we're gonna call it M. It's a two by two matrix. Okay. One, two, one, two. If we are at location one, then in a single step of the random walk we stay there with probability three quarters and we move to two with probability a quarter. Meanwhile, if we are at location two, then in a single step of the random walk, we move to one with probability a half and we remain at two with probability a half. So the random walk is captured by this two by two transition matrix. Now, when we do this random walk for a while, we are eventually gonna settle into some stationary distribution. So that's a distribution over the space X. What distribution is it? Well, since it's a distribution over X, it's given by the probability of being at location one and the probability of being at location two. And of course these probabilities have to add up to one. What is this stationary distribution? Well, we know that it's a distribution that's unaffected by one step of the random walk and therefore pi transpose times M equals pi transpose. So if we write it out, what we are saying is that AB times this matrix, M, three quarters, one quarter, a half, a half is equal once again to AB. Let's solve these equations. Okay, so first we get the three quarters A, let's look at this column. Three quarters A plus a half B equals A. And now let's look at this column. It tells us that a quarter A plus a half B equals B. Okay, so let's go ahead and solve this. Let's look at this equation. Bringing the Bs over to one side we get that A equals two B. So A is twice B, and we know that A and B add up to one. Therefore the stationary distribution is two thirds, one third. What this means is that if we do the random walk, okay, so we can start wherever we like. We can start at location one or location two and then follow the random walk given in this diagram. If we do it for lots of steps then we will eventually settle in to this stationary distribution, a distribution that is in location one, two thirds of the time and location two one third of the time. So in our setting we are given a distribution P that we wanna sample from and we are gonna set up the mechanics of the random walk carefully so that the stationary distribution is exactly the distribution we want, is exactly our target distribution P. Now, there are two hurdles that we have to jump over in order to get to that. The first is that sometimes there are lots of stationary distributions and you could end up in any of them. This is not a good situation. We have a very specific stationary distribution in mind, the target distribution P, and we don't want there to be other alternative stationary distributions that we could potentially end up in. In order to prevent this happening, all we need to do is to make sure the following condition holds: It says that there's some number of steps K such that within that number of steps you can get from any place in X to any other place. You can get from any X to any X prime within K steps. As long as there's some K for which this is true, we're all set. There will be just one stationary distribution. Okay, that's good. So there's just one stationary distribution but we want it to be the right distribution. We want it to be distribution P. In order to make sure that's the case we just have to make sure that our random walk satisfies something called the detailed balance condition. And what this says is that let's look at our target distribution P. The probability of X under our target distribution times the probability of moving from X to X prime in one step of the random walk should be the same, as the probability of X prime times the probability of moving from X prime to X in one step of the random walk. Now in our case, the distribution is fixed beforehand. This is a distribution that we want to sample from. And what we get to set up is the random walk. So we get to choose M, we get to define the random walk any way we like. We are gonna choose it so that it satisfies this property. And if we have that, it means that the stationary distribution will be exactly the distribution P that we want. And so all we need to do is to do our random walk for many steps and then just stop and output our current position. And that will indeed be a random draw from the desired distribution P. So it's all pretty ingenious. And next time we'll see how this can be realized using a method called the Gibb Sampler. 