(mid tempo music) - Now that we've introduced principle component analysis let's look at a little case study of how it has been used in quantifying personality. Now, we all have personalities that differ in some ways and are similar in others. And for the longest time, people have been interested in trying to quantify these similarities and differences, in trying to determine the axes of variation of personalities. Is it possible, for example, to capture somebody's personality using a low dimensional vector? Major progress towards quantifying personality was made in the previous century, and a lot of it sprang first from the lexical hypothesis. This is the very simple observation that any personality characteristic of any significance at all has a corresponding word in English. So with this in mind, two researchers, Allport and Odbert, sat down with the English dictionary and just went through it, circling all words that described some aspect of personality, and they found 4,500 such words. This was a major effort. A couple of decades later, people went back to these words to this list of 4,500 words, and realized that a lot of them were in fact redundant, they were synonyms. For example, jolly, merry, witty, lively, peppy. And so they said, "Let's remove this redundancy." Let's group these synonyms together. And when they did that, they got a list of just 500 words, 500 personality descriptors. At that point, it was time to start collecting data. And so they brought people into their lab, and they just gave them these 500 words and said "Which of these words describes you?" So the way this went, is that somebody came into the lab, let's say person one, and was given a list of these 500 words and asked, "Okay, word number one, shy. "To what extent does this describe you? "Rate it on a scale of one to five, "where one is strongly disagree and five is strongly agree." And so maybe person one said, "I agree that I'm shy. "I strongly disagree that I'm merry. "I strongly disagree that I'm tense. "I disagree that I'm boastful. "I strongly think that I'm forgiving," and so on. And in this way, person one's data constituted a vector of length 500, since there were 500 words. And then the next person came in, and the next person, and in this way, a data matrix was collected. If there were N people then this matrix was a size N by 500. And so the next step was to use this to get insights into personality. How could this be done? Well, actually, lots of different methods of unsupervised learning could be used for this. One idea is to cluster the columns. Okay, so remember that there is a column corresponding to each word. So let's say hypothetically that people who are shy also tend to be forgiving. If that's the case those two columns are likely to be highly correlated and would end up in the same cluster. In this way, a simple clustering procedure could give a lot of insight into what personality traits go together. Another idea is to apply PCA. Each person is now represented as a 500 dimensional vector. We could apply PCA to get a compressed representation say of five or 10 dimensions. Maybe this would yield insights into personality. And there were many other methods proposed and tried as well. Let's look at the PCA approach in more detail. So as we've seen PCA is very good at exploiting correlations. So for instance, let's say hypothetically that there's a big correlation between trust and generosity. That people who are trusting tend to be generous and vice versa. If this correlation were perfect, then people's answers to these two questions, "are you generous? "Are you trusting?" Would actually lie along this line. And a single PCA trait would be able to capture both of these features perfectly. This is the sort of thing that researchers were hoping for from PCA, that PCA would be able to figure out correlations or dependencies between different personality traits. Okay, so let's go back to the data matrix and see what PCA would do in this case. So each person is represented as a 500 dimensional vector. The answers to questions about 500 different words. This means that the covariance matrix of the data, call it sigma, is 500 by 500. PCA starts by computing this covariance matrix and then determines its Eigenvectors, U1, U2 and so on. All of which are 500 dimensional vectors. The first principle component of the data is then X projected onto U1 and the second principle component is X projected onto U2, and then X projected onto U3, and X projected onto U4 and X projected onto U5, and so on. So what the researchers did was to take the first five principle components of the data. So for example, let's look at the first principle component. Maybe for person one their 500 dimensional vector when dot producted with U1 gave a value of 3.2. For person two it might've been -1.6, for person three it might have been 4.1, and so on. These values were the first principle component of the data. We can think of this as a synthetic personality trait call it trait T1, a new personality trait determined as a result of data analysis, and corresponding to the first principle component of the data, the first Eigenvector of the covariance matrix. Now, the second principle component maybe those values were numbers like 11.0, 0.1, -6.9, and the third one might have been 2.9, 6.3, - 4.8, and so on. So in this way each person's 500 dimensional vector was compressed to the top five principle components. This was a form of dimensionality reduction a condensed personality descriptor from which the original 500 dimensional vector that is the answers to the questions about those 500 words, could be approximately reconstructed. So this was interesting just by itself it was the way of condensing people's personalities into a very short descriptor, in this case, a five dimensional descriptor. But the thing that really interested the researchers was what are these personality traits? What is this synthetic trait T1? what is this first principle component? What does it correspond to in human terms? So in order to figure this out, what they did is they said, "Let's look at this column of numbers "and let's look at these columns "and see which one which ones "this is highly correlated with. "After all, we know what these columns mean. "We have the words that they correspond to, "and maybe, by looking at which of these words "are highly correlated with this new synthetic trait, "it will give us insight into what T1 really is "and into what T2 really is, and so on." So for the first trait, T1, they found that it was highly correlated with the columns for talkative, assertive, active, and energetic, whereas it had a high negative correlation with quiet, reserved, shy, and silent. Based on this, they got a pretty good idea of what this trait was capturing, of what this PCA feature, this principle component, was capturing. And they said, "Let's call it extroversion. "That's a good way to describe it." Then they moved on to the second synthetic personality trait. And they found that that column was highly correlated with sympathetic, kind, appreciative, affectionate, and negatively correlated with fault finding, cold, unfriendly. They said, "Let's call this agreeableness, "it's a good way to describe the synthetic trait." And in the same way they were able to characterize the remaining three traits, conscientiousness, neuroticism, and openness. These came to be known as the big five taxonomy for personality. And in fact, personality descriptors of this type are now very widely used, for example in computerized matchmaking. So we've seen how data analysis and principle component analysis can be used to obtain some very basic insights into human personalities. 