(upbeat music) - So we have defined the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of a matrix. We'll now see how these can be used to get a simpler form of the matrix to understand the matrix in a more simple and intuitive way. So let's start with any matrix M that is a d by d symmetric matrix. What we've seen is that such a matrix has d eigenvectors, u one through ud, that are orthonormal. They're unit length, and they're at right angles to each other. And these have corresponding eigenvalues, lambda one through lambda d. Now, what we can do is to write down a matrix U whose columns are these eigenvectors. So it's columns are u one through ud which means that U is a d by d matrix. Now, that means that U transpose is the d by d matrix whose rows are the eigenvectors instead of the columns. And now, let's write down another matrix lambda that is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the eigenvalues, lambda one through lambda d. Okay? It turns out that the original matrix M is always equal to u times lambda times u transpose. And this is called the spectral decomposition of matrix M. It's another way to write the matrix. Now, this is remarkable in at least two ways. The first is that it tells us that we can recover M completely from its eigenvalues and eigenvectors. That is to say, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors tell us everything there is to know about M. They contain full information about M. We can recover M uniquely from them. The second thing is that this is an alternative way of writing M that actually makes it quite a bit simpler. Now, at first glance, this might not seem like a simplification. After all, M was originally a d by d matrix, and now we've written it as the product of three d by d matrices. How is that any simpler? Well, the simplification is that M was originally a pretty arbitrary matrix, whereas we've now written it as the product of three matrices that are very simple and easy to understand. Why is that? What's so simple about these three matrices? Well, let's look at this one here. All this matrix is doing is taking a vector and rewriting it in the basis corresponding to the eigenvectors. So when you multiply, you transpose by a vector x, it takes the vector, which is in the original coordinate basis and just translates it, just rotates it into the basis of u one, u two through ud. It's a basis change matrix. It rewrites vectors in this coordinate system that suits the matrix M. Likewise, u take something in M'S coordinate system and maps it back to the original coordinate system. So in a sense, most of what M is doing is just shifting between coordinate systems. When you multiply M by a vector x, the first thing it does is to transfer x to its own coordinate system. In its own coordinate system, it's just the matrix lambda, which is the diagonal matrix, which scales each coordinate separately. And then, once it's done with that simple diagonal operation, it maps back to our original coordinate system. Another way to think about this is that the eigenvectors represent the natural coordinate system for the matrix, and in its own coordinate system, M is just a diagonal matrix. Okay? So matrices are easy to understand in their own coordinate systems. Now, let's see the spectral decomposition at work. So here's a matrix that we saw earlier, and last time, we determined that its eigenvectors and eigenvalues were the following. Now, what does the spectral decomposition say about M? Well, let's see. The matrix u is the two by two matrix whose columns are the eigenvectors. So what is u? Well, let's pull out the one over square root two. The columns are the eigenvectors. So the first eigenvector and the second eigenvector. Lambda is the two by two diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the eigenvalue. So what's that? That is negative one, zero, zero, three. Now, the spectral decomposition claims that M is equal to u lambda u transpose. Let's check that. Okay, so let's multiply u times lambda times u transpose. Now, both u and u transpose have a one over square root two in front of them. Let's pull those out, so we get a half. And now, let's write down u. So one, negative one, one, one. Let's write down lambda, negative one, zero, zero, three. And let's write down u transpose, which is one, one, negative one, one. Okay, so maybe we can start by multiplying these two together. We get, it's copied on the first matrix, and now for the matrix product, we get minus one, again, minus one, minus three, and three. And now, when we multiply these, the next two matrices, we get negative one plus three, we get negative one, negative three, we get negative one, negative three, and we get negative one plus three. And when we take half of that, we get one minus two minus two, one, which is indeed the original matrix M. So you can see that this matrix M can be rewritten in this way entirely in terms of its eigenvectors and eigenvalues. Now, let's see how this gives us another view into principle component analysis. So in principle component analysis, our starting point is some dataset in high dimensional space, say in D-dimensional space. We have a bunch of points in this space, and the first thing we do is to figure out the covariance matrix of the data. Now, this is a d by d matrix and it's symmetric. This means that we can talk about its eigenvectors and eigenvalues and spectral decomposition. So let's say that its eigenvectors are u one through ud and the corresponding eigenvalues are lambda one, lambda two through lambda d. We will order the eigenvectors in decreasing order of their eigenvalues. So what we call the top eigenvector is in fact the eigenvector that has the largest eigenvalue and the second eigenvector u sub two is the one whose eigenvalue is second largest and so on. Now, what we want is to project the data into a lower dimensional space and the eigenvectors give us an alternative basis in which to think of the data. So this is the first eigenvector. This is the second eigenvector. Okay? Now, the variance in this direction, in the direction you want, is given by lambda one, is given by the eigenvalue and the variance in direction u two is given by lambda two. So what PCA is doing is choosing its k directions to simply be the top k eigenvectors, u one through uk. These are the directions in which the variance is the highest. So here's a question. What is the covariance of the projected data? Okay, so what is the covariance of the projected k-dimensional data? In other words, of x dot u one, all the way to x dot uk? Well, first of all, this is k-dimensional, so we know that the covariance matrix must be k by k. Okay, let's start with x dot u one. We already know that the variance in the direction of u one, the variance of x dot u one is just lambda one. And similarly, along the diagonal, we have lambda two through lambda k. What about the off-diagonal entries? Well, if we tilt our head and look at the data in this alternative basis, in the eigenbasis, we see that it is uncorrelated. So the off-diagonal entries are zero. PCA has the added benefit of making the data uncorrelated. Okay, so we've talked about the spectral decomposition of a matrix. This is a very powerful tool that's used for all sorts of different things. For us, we've seen already how it gives us another view into principle component analysis. 