(ambient music) - Welcome back, everybody. We will now talk about one of the grand workhorses of unsupervised learning: principle component analysis. This is a method of dimensionality reduction, that is to say, a type of compression. Let's start by talking just a little bit about dimensionality reduction. What is it, and why would we want to do it? Well, let's say that we have a data set that is very high dimensional. That is to say, it has a lot of features, a lot of coordinates. Do we really need all these features, or is it possible that there is a different representation that is more economical, that has fewer features while retaining essentially all the same information? What would be the benefit of finding this more compressed representation? Well, there are many benefits. One very simple benefit is that having lower dimensional data requires less computation time. Perhaps more importantly, it also requires less memory. A second benefit is that when the dimension is very high, it's often the case that there are strong dependencies between some of the features. That is to say, there is overlapping information in the features. For instance, let's say that we're dealing with gene expression data, where there is a feature for each gene. Often, there are large groups of genes that are co-expressed that work together as a unit that have very similar expression levels. Do we really need separate features for them? Or, in our application, is it enough to treat them as a unit and just have a single feature for an entire group of genes? A third benefit of reducing dimension is that, in the process, we often remove features that are noisy or irrelevant. For instance, if we are trying to predict a patient's susceptibility to a particular disease, it is irrelevant what the patient's zip code is or social security number. If these are features in the data, as they often are in medical records, they should simply be removed. So there are many reasons to reduce dimension, but how do we do this? How can we come up with a more compact representation of high-dimensional data? So, let's start by looking at a simple example. We have over here an image from the MNIST dataset. And if you recall, this is a dataset of handwritten digits. Each digit is a grayscale image of size 28 x 28, and as a result, any such image can be written as a vector of length 784. So, a vector in 784 dimensional space: How do you do that? Well, you just copy down the first row of pixels, then the second row, and so on. 784 is 28 x 28. Okay, so here we have data that's 784 dimensional, 784 pixels. Do we really need all of these pixels? If we were to discard some of them, what would be the prime candidates? Well, let's see. We could certainly discard the pixels in the corners. And the reason for that is that those pixels are always off. They're completely uninformative. So, by throwing them away, we could drop the dimension from 784 down to 780 immediately. Now, if we wanted to drop the dimension further, which pixels would we discard next? Well, let's see. Why did we discard those four pixels? We discarded them because they don't vary at all. In other words, they have very low variance. To be precise, 0 variance. So, if we wanted to discard more pixels, maybe the ones we should choose to discard are the ones with lowest variance. So, the prime candidates for pixels to discard would be the pixels with the lowest variance. Let's see how this plays out. So, for MNIST, each image has 784 features. Let's call them X1, X2, all the way to X784. The total variance in these features is just the summation over all the pixels, so from I = 1 to 784 of the variance of each of those pixels. This is the total variance in the data. And if the pixels all had the same variance, then they would all be 1/784 of this total. But that's not the case at all. So, what I've done in this picture is to order the pixels by increasing variance. So let's, for example, look at 600. What this picture says is that if we look at the 600 pixels that have the lowest variance, then together, they constitute less than 40% of the overall variance. The most interesting part about this picture is actually this region over here. What it tells us is that we can throw away 300 to 400 pixels, 300 to 400 coordinates, and lose almost no variance as a result. In other words, we can very easily reduce the dimension from 784 down to something like 400. How would we do this? By simply discarding the pixels that have the lowest variance or equivalently retaining the 400 pixels with the highest variance. And in doing so, we would lose almost none of the information in the original data. So this is great. We are able to roughly half the dimension. It'll turn out, however, that we can actually reduce the dimension much further. Instead of going down to just 400, we can go down to 50 or below. But the key to doing that is to go beyond coordinate projection. Instead of projecting onto individual coordinates, we need to project onto more general directions. So, to understand what might be going on, let's look at this simple data set over here. It's a two-dimensional data set. This feature is X1. This feature is X2. And we have roughly 100 points over here. If we look at just X1, there's quite a lot of variance along that feature, and likewise with X2. So, we would be disinclined to drop either of these features. And yet, looking at the data, we see that the two features are highly correlated. So, it really seems like there must be some way to compress this information into a single feature. In other words, to reduce the dimension from 2 down to 1. The way to do that would be to project onto this direction. What would that mean? So this is a direction. Projecting this point onto that direction would mean taking that two-dimensional point, dropping it onto that direction at right angles, and replacing the two-dimensional point by just a single number, namely this length over here. So, from two dimensions, we would go down to one dimension. Likewise, this point over here, this two-dimensional point, would project onto this number over here: would project onto a single number. So we could take this data set of 100 points, project onto this direction, and then we'd get 100 numbers. Each two-dimensional point would become a single number. So we'd get these 100 numbers, and we could look at the variance of those numbers. And it turns out that this direction here, the red line, is the direction of maximum variance. So what does that mean exactly? So let's start by talking about the choices of different directions that we could project onto. We could project onto this direction. We could project onto this direction. We could project onto this direction. There are literally infinitely many choices. So, for instance, let's say we just decide to project onto the X1 direction. What does that mean? It means that we take a two-dimensional point, X1 and X2, and we map it to the single number X1. What is the variance of the projection? Well, it's simply the variance of the feature X1. Likewise, we could project onto this direction, the X2 direction. What would that mean? It means that we start with one of these two-dimensional points and we simply map to the second coordinate X2. So, the two-dimensional points become numbers, X2, and we can look at the variance of those numbers, which is the variance of X2. Those are coordinate projections. But we are now gonna generalize the notion of projection to include projections onto arbitrary directions like this, this direction U over here. What does that projection look like? So we take a point, X1, X2, we project onto this direction, and we get a single number. So we take X1, X2, we project onto that direction, and the number we get will turn out to be some linear combination of X1, X2, something of the form AX1 + BX2. But the bottom line is we get a number. And so when we project these 100 points, we get 100 numbers, and we can look at their variance. We wanna find the direction along which this variance is maximized, the direction of maximum variance. It sounds like there are infinitely many directions to choose from. But it turns out that there's actually a simple formula for the variance in any direction and also a simple way to find the direction in which that variance is the greatest. But before we get to do all that, we have to first formally define what we mean by projection. So let's say we have a vector X, and we wanna project onto a direction U. So this is the vector X. That's the direction U. And this point here is the origin. Now, this direction U is given by a vector. But for the purposes of projection, it doesn't matter if we give this vector or this one, or this one, or this one. The length of the vector is irrelevant. All of these multiples refer to the same direction. It turns out that, mathematically, it will be most convenient if we choose the vector to have unit length, for it to have length 1. That is to say, if we choose it to be a unit vector. How do we do this? Well, let's say we want to project onto the direction 3,4. Is this a unit vector? No, it has length, square root of 3 squared + 4 squared, which is the square root of 25, which is five. This vector has length 5. How do we convert it into a unit vector? To do that, we just divide by its length. So we multiply it by 1/5, and we get 3/5, 4/5. In this way, it's easy to find a unit vector in the direction we want. If our direction does not have length 1, we simply divide by the length. So we have a vector X. We wanna project onto a direction U. This is the origin over here. And let's say that this direction is now represented by a unit vector. So, U is a unit vector. It has length 1. What is this projection? What is this length over here? It turns out that it's simply the dot product of X and U. It's simply X.U, which is the same as U.X, which is the same as U transposed on times X, which is exactly this summation over here. Why is that the case? Well, let's look at this picture. We have these two vectors, X and U. The angle between them, let's call it theta. Then using trigonometry, we know that this length over here, let's call it question mark. Question mark is equal to this length, the hypotenuse of the triangle. So, this is the hypotenuse. This is a right triangle. The unknown length is equal to the hypotenuse of the triangle, which is the length of X times the cosine of theta. And we also know that when you have two vectors, the cosine of the angle between them is given by the dot product of the two vectors divided by their lengths. And moreover, the length of U is equal to 1. And so, we just get X.U. So, projection is just dot product. Nice and simple. Let's look at some examples of this. So we start with a two-dimensional point, 2,3. So, let's draw this. We have the X1 axis and the X2 axis. We have 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3. And our point X is at 2,3. So it's over here somewhere. This is our point. Now, we wanna project it onto the X1 axis. What's that? Well, we know immediately that it's equal to 2, but what direction is it officially? Well, the direction is just the X1 direction, which is 1,0. And so U.X is 1,0.2,3. It's that dot product, which is 2, as expected. Now, let's project onto the direction 1 - 1. So this time, U is equal to 1 - 1. Uh-oh, that's not a unit direction. The length of that vector is the square root of 1 squared plus - 1 squared, which is the square root of 2. So, the first thing we have to do is to make U into a unit vector. And we do that by dividing by its length. So we divide by 1 over square root 2. Now we can get the projection. It's simply U.X, which is 1 over square root 2 x 1 - 1.2,3. And so this is equal to -1 over square root 2. Pictorially, what is that? Well, let's see. We've already drawn the vector X. Our direction U is 1 - 1. So the direction looks something like this. This is our direction U, and we are projecting onto that direction. And so the projection ends up landing somewhere over here. And so this length is 1 over square root 2. If you were to take out a ruler and measure it, it would be 1 over square root 2. And we have a negative sign in front because it's on the other side of the origin. Okay, so we formally defined what a projection is. It's an intuitive geometric concept, and it turns out that, happily, it is also very simple mathematically. Algebraically, it is simply a dot product. Next, we'll talk about finding the very best projection. 