(lively music) (screen whooshing) - So far, we have talked about projecting a dataset onto a single direction and finding the best direction, the direction in which the variance is maximized. However, when we're doing dimensionality reduction, it's usually not the case that we can reduce the dimension down to one. That ends up losing too much information. Typically, we end up reducing the dimension down to some intermediate value, k. What that means is that instead of projecting to just a single direction, we are projecting to k different directions. Let's see how that works out. So let's say that we have data points in some high dimensional space, Rd, and now we wanna reduce the dimension but not necessarily all the way down to one. We want to reduce the dimension from d to some intermediate value k. To do that, we choose k directions, u1 through uk and we want to project onto those directions. What is the mathematical form of this projection? So it turns out that the projection is easiest to do when these vectors, u1 through uk are orthonormal. This means that they satisfy two properties. First of all, they're all unit length. So u1 has length one, uk has length one and so on. And second, these vectors are at right angles to each other. That is to say the dot products between these vectors are all zero. If the vectors satisfy these properties, if they are orthonormal, then there's a very simple formula for the projection. Point x, which is d-dimensional gets projected down to a k-dimensional vector. The first coordinate of the projection is just x.u1. The second coordinate is x.u2 and the last coordinate is x.uk. Very simple. Now, we'll sometimes write this in matrix form. So to do this, let's create a matrix whose columns are the directions that we're projecting onto. So its first column is u1, its second column is u2, all the way to uk. What is the size of this matrix? It is a d by k matrix. It has k columns, and each of those columns, u1, u2 and so on are d-dimensional vectors. Now, the projection of x is x.u1, x.U2, x.uk and that is the same as U transpose x. Okay, so this is the vector x and U transpose is a k by d matrix whose rows are u1, u2, all the way to uk. So projection is simply multiplication by this matrix U transpose. Now, how do we find the best possible projection? And what do we even mean by that? Well, what we want is the projection that captures as much as possible of the variance of the data, the projection with the maximum variance. What are the vectors you want u to uk that maximize the variance? Well, once again, it depends on the eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix of the data. So our data is x and its covariance matrix sigma is some d by d matrix. And as we said last time, this is not just any old matrix but it has all sorts of special properties. It is square, d by d, it is symmetric and it is positive semidefinite. As a result, this d by d matrix has d special directions associated with it called the eigenvectors of the matrix. So these are d special directions associated with the matrix sigma, and it turns out that these directions are orthonormal. They are unit length and they're at right angles to each other. There are associated eigenvalues, lambda one through lambda d, that tell us how much that matrix is stretched out in a sense in those corresponding directions. So we'll be talking more about the eigendecomposition later on. For the time being, the key point is that the eigendecomposition is very easy to obtain. One line of Python will do the trick. And moreover, for our purposes, the eigendecomposition gives us the very best choice of directions to project onto. The k directions that maximize the variance of the projection are simply the top k eigenvectors, u1 through uk. Projecting the data onto these k directions is called principal component analysis. And each of the coordinates of the projection are the principal components of the data. The first coordinate is the first principal component of the data. The second coordinate is the second principal component and so on. So this is principal component analysis in a nutshell. It gives us the very best choice of k directions in which to project the data. So let's see how this plays out in the case of MNIST. So MNIST we know is 784 dimensional. Let's say we want to reduce the dimension substantially. Let's say we wanna reduce to say 200 dimensions. Now, one way to do this, which we discussed earlier is a very naive way. We could just use coordinate directions. That is we could just pick the 200 pixels with highest variance. The blue curve shows what happens when you do that. If we reduce to 200 dimensions, if we choose the 200 pixels with the highest variance, then it turns out that we end up losing close to 40% of the overall variance of the data. So we lose a lot of information if we do coordinate projections. Principal component analysis uses more general projections. The projections aren't necessarily aligned with the coordinate axes. They are arbitrary directions in space, and in this way, we're able to exploit correlations in the data. If you use PCA, principal component analysis, to reduce the dimension to 200, it turns out that you get a 200 dimensional representation, a 200 dimensional projection that loses less than 5% of the overall variance in the data. So we lose very little information indeed. So PCA is much better at finding informative directions than a naive projection onto individual coordinates. Let's see what this looks like pictorially. So we again have the MNIST dataset and for MNIST, the covariance matrix of the entire dataset will be a matrix that's 784 by 784. If we do the eigendecomposition of this matrix, we get back its eigenvectors. Let's call them u1, u2, all the way to u784. These are directions in 784 dimensional space. Each of these is a unit vector and they're all at right angles to each other. You can think of them as an alternative basis of 784 dimensional space. Now, if we want to use PCA to reduce the dimension to 200 or to k more generally, what we do is we map x to x.u1 all the way to x.uk. We simply map onto the eigenvector directions. So what we're showing over here is an original image x and the effect of projecting to different dimensions k. So here we have the projection to 200 dimensions. Here we go down to 150 dimensions. Here we go down to 100 and here we go all the way down to 50. So what you can see is that in going down to about 150 dimensions, we lose almost nothing. It looks almost identical to the original image. When we go down to 100, we've maybe lost a little bit. When we go down to 50, it's a little bit more blurry but still, it's clear that we've lost very little. And so you can see that we can reduce the dimension down to around 50 while losing very little. PCA is a great way to reduce dimension for the MNIST dataset. But wait a second, what are these pictures over here? Let's look at this one. We reduced the dimension down to 50. So we went down to 50 numbers. So what is this picture that I'm showing you? If I show you an image, it has to be 784 dimensional. It has to be something that's 28 by 28. So what is this? Well, what this is is a reconstruction of the image based on the projection. So we started with an image that was 784 dimensional. We went down to 50 numbers. We went down to a very compressed form and now what I'm showing you is a reconstruction based on that compressed form in the original space. So the compressed form ended up losing some information. So we cannot reconstruct perfectly, but as you can see, we can do a pretty good job. So mathematically, what does this reconstruction look like? How do we go back from the compressed form to the original space? So let's start by looking at what happens when we project onto just one direction. So we have a dataset with points x. We choose a direction u. And now the projection. So x is the original data and the projection is just x.u. So for example, this point projects onto the value given by this length. And this picture over here on the left shows the projected data. We started within this case a 2D dataset and we projected everything down to 1D. And so for example, this point over here projected to this value. It became the one-dimensional value 7.4 say. So 7.4. We just have this one number. How do we project back up? How do we map back up to two-dimensional space? Well, what we say is move 7.4 units in direction u. So this is direction u and we say just walk along direction u and go 7.4 units. This is the reconstruction. So the reconstruction is 7.4 times u. So more generally, the projection is x.u and the reconstruction is x.u times u. Whatever number x.u is, we move that many units in direction u. So reconstruction is quite easy. And in fact, another way of writing this is to bring the u to the other side and write the dot product as a transpose. And we get uu transpose times x. So we go from x to its projection U transpose x to the reconstruction UU transpose x. Fairly straightforward. But let's see what happens when instead of projecting to just one direction, w're now projecting to k directions. So we're projecting on k directions that are orthonormal, u1 through uk. And so the original vector x, which is say in d-dimensional space, gets mapped to its projection x.u1, x.u2, all the way to x.uk. And these are just some numbers, maybe x.u1 is 2.6, maybe x.u2 is negative 1.3, maybe x.uk is 3.8. And so on. How do we go from these k numbers back to the original d-dimensional space? Well, what we say is move 2.6 units in direction u1. So move 2.6 units in direction u1. Then move negative 1.3 units in direction u2 and so on. And finally, move 3.8 units in direction uk. And this gives us a vector in the original d-dimensional space, the reconstructed vector. So mathematically, we start with a point x in d-dimensional space. The projection is U transpose x where U is the d by k matrix whose columns are u1, u2, u3 to uk. So this is the rejection And this is a k-dimensional vector. So we've compressed the data, we've gone from d-dimensions down to k, and now when we wanna reconstruct, we just multiply it by U again and we get UU transpose x. And this is back in d-dimensional space. So both operations are very simple. Projecting is multiplying by U transpose and reconstructing is multiplying by U. So returning to the MNIST example, here we have a matrix U whose columns are the top eigenvectors of the covariance matrix of the data. And let's look at the projection onto 50. So we start with images x that are in 784 dimensional space. When we project, we go down to 50 dimensions and that's U transpose x. And when we reconstruct, we get UU transpose x and that's back in 784 dimensional space. And of course, we've lost a little bit of information along the way but as you can see, in this case, we didn't lose very much. So principal component analysis gives us a way of projecting and reconstructing in which both these operations are just simple linear operations. This is a very simple and effective form of dimensionality reduction and that's what explains its huge popularity. It's one of the most widely used statistical procedures of all time. 