(gentle music) - The topic of eigenvectors and eigenvalues has come up repeatedly and every time we postpone discussing them. Well, the time is finally upon us. So, here is a simple two dimensional data set. The two features X1 and X2, and as you can see, there is some dependence between the features. There's a positive correlation between them. If we were to fit a Gaussian to this data, it would look something like this. Now, here is an alternative set of coordinates for the same data set. It's an alternative basis. Any one of these points like this one, for example, could be expressed in either basis. We could express it in our normal coordinate basis or we could express it in the U1 U2 basis. Moving between these two coordinate systems is just a simple rotation operation. Now, what is the advantage of this new basis of the U1, U2 basis? Well, if you just tilt your head a little bit and look at the dataset in this new coordinate system, you see that it suddenly becomes uncorrelated. So, in a way, the data is easier to understand or is simpler in the U1, U2 basis than it is in the original coordinate basis. For us, this is one of the things that eigenvectors and eigenvalues will give us. They will provide us with an alternative coordinate system that simplifies data sets. So now let's get to the definition of eigenvector and eigenvalue. Let's start with any matrix M that is square, a D by D matrix. Any such matrix defines a linear function that maps a vector X to M times X. So it maps a D dimensional vector to another D dimensional vector. For instance, if M is a three by three matrix then M is a mapping of three-dimensional space. You give it a three-dimensional point and it sends it to a different three-dimensional point. So it maps space around. Now it turns out that there will always be certain points that get mapped in the same direction, that get mapped to a point that points in the same direction. And these are special directions for this matrix M and that's what we call the eigenvectors of M. So we'll say that U, we'll say the D dimensional vector U is an eigenvector for M. If M maps you to something in the same direction, to something that is a multiple of U. And this multiple, the scaler multiple lambda is the eigenvalue associated with U. So eigenvalues and eigenvectors come in pairs. An eigenvector is something that M maps in the same direction and the eigenvalue is the multiple by which M maps it. So eigenvectors are special directions associated with this matrix M. Let's look at a simple example. So let's say we have this three by three diagonal matrix M. What are its eigenvectors and eigenvalues? Well, it turns out that for a diagonal matrix, it's easy to figure out the eigenvectors. So let's try, for example the first coordinate vector, one, zero, zero, and let's see what M does to it. So M times this vector is simply two, zero, zero. So M maps the vector U1 onto twice U1. It maps U1 in the same direction with a scaling factor of two. Therefore, U1 is an eigenvector of M and the eigenvalue associated with it which we'll call lambda one, is equal to two. Similarly, another eigenvector is the second coordinate direction. When you take M times this direction, U2, you get zero, negative one, zero. In other words, you get minus one times U2. So it maps U2 onto a multiple of U2 and this time the multiple is negative one. So the second eigenvalue is negative one. By this time, you can guess what the third eigenvector is. It's simply the third coordinate direction. M times U3 is equal to 0, 0, 10, which is 10 times U3. And so the third eigenvalue is 10. Okay, so we have found three eigenvectors for this matrix and we found corresponding eigenvalues. Lambda one, lambda two, and lambda three. Are there other eigenvectors? Well, all the other eigenvectors are just multiples of these so we don't count them. Okay, so these are our three eigenvectors and notice that they're all at right angles to each other. U1.U2 equals zero, U2.U3 equals zero, and so on. And this will turn out to be a general rule. So more generally, let's take any matrix M that is a symmetric D by D matrix. Then M has got D eigenvectors, U1 through UD. D vectors in D dimensional space that are orthonormal. They are unit length and they're at right angles to each other. They have dot products of zero and the corresponding eigenvalues we'll call Lambda one through lambda D. We will think of these D eigenvectors, U1 through UD as sort of a natural coordinate system for this matrix, M. It's the basis that the matrix is in a sense the most comfortable with. It's a basis in which this matrix will become quite easy to understand as we will later see. So let's do a little example. We have this two by two matrix over here and what I'm claiming is that it's eigenvectors are U1, which is this 2-D vector and U2, which is this other 2-D vector. So first let's check that these are orthonormal. Orthonormal means that they're unit length and they're at right angles to each other. Are they unit length? Does U1 have length one? Yes, it does U2, also length one. Good, so they're unit length. Let's check that they're at right angles. And what we need to check there is the dot product between these two vectors. What's U1.U2? Well, that's one over square root two, one, one, dot product with one over square root two, negative one one. And sure enough, that's zero. Okay, good. So these two vectors are, in fact, orthonormal. Now, if there are eigenvectors, then we will be able to quickly recover the corresponding eigenvalues. So let's go ahead and do that. What is M times U1? Well, M is one, negative two, negative two, one. Let's multiply it by U1, which is one over square root two, one, one. Let's pull out the one over square root two. Okay, now what do we get? We get one minus two, so that's negative one and we get negative two plus one. So, that's again, negative one. So in fact, this is equal to minus U1. So indeed M maps U1 to a multiple of itself. And so the corresponding eigenvalue is negative one. Now let's do U2. M times U2 is one negative two, negative two, one, times one over square root two times negative one, one. Let's pull out the one over square root two and we have negative one, negative two, so negative three. And then we have two plus one, which is three, which is exactly three times U2. So again, M maps U2 to a multiple of itself. So U2 is in fact an eigenvector of M and the corresponding eigenvalue is equal to three. So indeed, these are the two eigenvectors of this matrix and they form an alternative orthogonal basis of the space. What is this basis? Well, our original coordinate basis, the basis that perhaps we are the most comfortable with looks like this, the usual coordinate system. What about U1 and U2? Well, U1 points in this direction and U2 points in this direction. So, the natural basis for this matrix is the basis U1, U2, which is a 45 degree rotation of the basis that we started off with. Okay, so we have now defined what eigenvalues and eigenvectors mean. And what we'll see next time is how these can be used to express a matrix in a slightly simpler form. 