(bright cheery music) - Last time, we talked about what it means to project data onto a single direction. What we'll discuss now is the very best direction, that is the direction in which the projected points have the highest possible variance. So let's recall our setup. Let's say that we have some data that is D dimensional, so our data vectors X lie in RD, and we want to reduce the dimension from D down to just one. The way we are gonna do this is to pick a direction U, given by a unit vector, that is a vector of length one in RD, and project all of the data onto this direction. What we saw last time is that the projection is given by a very simple formula. The D dimensional vector X has projection U dot X, the dot product of U and X. And in this way, all these D dimensional points map to single numbers, U dot X, and we can look at the variance of these numbers. We wanna find the direction U for which these projected numbers have the highest possible variance. How do we do this? What makes it difficult is that it seems like there are infinitely many directions to choose from. The first helpful fact is that there's a very simple formula that gives us the variance in any conceivable direction. So to see what it is, let's say that we have this D dimensional data, X, and let sigma be its covariance matrix. Since the data is D dimensional, sigma is a D by D matrix. Now for any direction U, that is any unit vector U, the projection of the data on that direction is X dot U, and it turns out that the projected numbers had variance U transpose sigma U. It's a single formula that gives the variance in every conceivable direction, U. So to understand this better, let's look at a simple example. So here's a two dimensional dataset. The first feature is X one, the second feature is X two, and what we are claiming is that the projection, in any direction, has a variance given by the formula, U transpose sigma U, where sigma is the covariance matrix of the data. Well what is sigma in this case? The data is two dimensional, so the covariance matrix must be two by two. And it turns out that it's this specific matrix here. So what are these numbers? Well, this number here is the variance of X one. This other diagonal entry is the variance of X two, and the off diagonal entries have to be equal because the matrix is symmetric and they are equal to the covariance of X one and X two. Okay, so that's the covariance matrix of this particular data set. And what we are claiming, is that for any direction U, the projection, of the data, onto that direction, has a variance, U transpose sigma U, okay? And U transpose sigma U is just a scaler value. It's just a number. Let's try this out for some directions. Okay, so first let's pick a direction in which we actually know the answer. We know that if we project onto the X one axis, we just end up with the first coordinate of each data point. Okay, the projections are just the first coordinate of each point, and we know what the variance of those are. We know that the variance equals one, okay? So let's try that out. What direction is that? What direction is the X one axis? Well, that's the direction one, zero. Now plugging into this formula, we have U transpose sigma U. So that's one, zero times the matrix, which is one, 0.85, 0.85, one, times one, zero, and that is in fact equal to one, as expected. Okay, so the formula gives the correct answer when the direction U is just the X one axis. Now let's try another direction for which we know the answer, namely the X two axis. Which direction is that? That's zero, one. This time we get U transpose sigma U is zero, one times one, 0.85, 0.85, one, times zero, one, and again, that's equal to one. So it gives the correct answer in that direction as well. Okay, so that's reassuring. Now let's try a more general direction. Let's look at this direction, for example, the 45 degree direction. What direction is that? Okay, so it is the direction one, one, but remember that we need our directions to be unit vectors, and this vector does not have length one. Its length is the square root of two. So to get a unit vector, we divide by the length, we divide by square root of two. Now let's plug into our formula. We have U transpose sigma U equals one over square root two, one, one, times this matrix, one, 0.85, 0.85, one, times one over square root two, one, one. Let's pull out the square root twos, so we get a half, and we do the matrix vector product, which gives us one plus 0.85 plus 0.85 plus one. And so the variance in that direction is 1.85. So the variance in this 45 degree direction is much greater than the variance in the X one direction or the X two direction. And pictorially, that certainly makes sense, okay? So great, we have a simple formula that gives us the variance in every conceivable direction. Now we want to find the direction in which this variance is as large as possible. For that, we turn to our second useful fact. So the variance in direction U is given by U transpose sigma U. We want to find the direction in which this is maximized. So find direction U that maximizes this. It turns out that there's a simple answer to this. That direction U, the direction of highest variance, is simply the first eigenvector of the covariance matrix, sigma. What do we mean by eigenvector? Well, eigenvectors and eigenvalues are very important in machine learning and we'll be talking about them more very soon. For the time being, here's the way to think about it. Sigma is the covariance matrix of the data. As a result, it's a D by D matrix, if the data is D dimensional, and it's not just any old matrix. So first of all, it's D by D, so we know it's a square matrix. We also know that this matrix is symmetric. Furthermore, it is positive, semi-definite. So it's a matrix that has lots of special properties. As a result, it turns out that this matrix has certain special directions associated with it, and these directions are called its eigenvectors. For each direction, there is a corresponding number, the eigenvalue, which tells us how much the matrix is stretched out in that direction. This probably sounds a little mysterious right now. We'll get into it in much more detail later, but the key point is that these eigenvectors and eigenvalues are just properties of the matrix and we can get them easily with a single line of Python. And the direction U that we seek, the direction of maximum variance is simply the first eigenvector of this matrix. So returning to our simple example, it turns out that the covariance matrix of this dataset, which we saw was one, 0.85, 0.85, one, has first eigenvector equal to the 45 degree line. One over square root two, one, one. So, in fact, the 45 degree line is the direction of maximum variance. And when we project data onto this direction, we call the projected values the first principle component of the data. So for any data set, if you look at the top eigenvector of the covariance matrix, that is the direction of maximum variance, and projecting the data onto that direction is called the top principle component of the data. Okay, so we've seen how to find the single best direction on which to project a data set, the direction along which the variance is the greatest. Next time we'll talk about projecting onto multiple directions. 