(ambient music) - We've talked a lot about principle component analysis which is a highly effective form of dimensionality reduction based on linear projection. But there are many other methods of linear projection that are also very handy. We'll now turn to one of them called random projection. It's quick and it's easy and it has strong guarantees associated with it. So the main result about random projection is captured by the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma from 1986. What this says at a high level is that any set of n points can be embedded into just log n dimensions. That is any set of n points can be written down in just log n dimensional space while approximately preserving the distances between points. So let's look at the precise statement. So you start by picking any value of epsilon less than 1/2. This captures how much error you're willing to permit in inter-point distances. You then set k to be 4 over epsilon squared times log n. This is gonna be the dimension of the embedded data, okay? The lower dimensional embedding. Now, what the Johnson-Lindenstrauss Lemma says is that any n points in d dimensional space no matter how large this d is can be embedded into just k dimensions into just order log n dimensions so that all of the inter-point distances are corrupted by at most a multiplicative factor of 1 plus or minus epsilon. So for example, let's say you pick epsilon equal to 0.1. What that means is that all inter-point distances are between 0.9 and 1.1 times their original values. So all inter-point distances between the embedded points in the low dimensional space are between 0.9 and 1.1 times the original distances in the high dimensional space Rd. This is a very strong guarantee. It means that we found a way to write these n points in low dimensional space that almost exactly captures the original distances between the points in higher dimension. What is the special embedding that is able to preserve distances so well? This is the best part. It turns out that it doesn't even need to be done very carefully. Even a random projection into k dimensional space will do the job. So what exactly do we mean by a random projection? Let's take a closer look. Our original data lies in some d dimensional space and we want to map it down to k dimensions. In order to do this by linear projection, we just multiply it by a matrix P, and here P is going to be of size, k times d. So P will look something like this. So we map our data down to k dimensions by simply multiplying it by a matrix P of this form. Now the matrix P is gonna be chosen at random. In particular, what we can do is to choose each of the entries of the matrix independently at random from some simple distribution, for example, a Gaussian distribution. So what we can do is to pick each entry of P independently at random from let's say, a standard Gaussian. Or we could even pick it from -1,1 where each entry is -1 with probability 1/2 plus 1 with probability 1/2, or many other choices. The startling thing here is that it's very easy to write down a matrix like this. This is in fact much simpler than principle component analysis. No, eigendecomposition is needed, and in fact, this choice of matrix P doesn't even look at the data and yet, it has a strong guarantee on how well it preserves distances between data points. Okay, so that's it for our overview of linear projection. We've spent a lot of time developing principle component analysis and we've also briefly mentioned another method, random projection, that can be highly effective in practice. 