(bright music) - So we've just talked about the application of singular value decomposition for topic modeling. Now let's turn to another application: to recommended systems. Most of the details and images that we'll go over are from a paper by Koren, Bell, and Volinsky. These are the winners of the first Netflix Prize, a prize given by the streaming company to the creators of a good movie recommendation system. Recommended systems are everywhere: in Amazon, in newspapers, in streaming services of all kinds. The idea is simply to recommend new products to users. One naive way of doing this is to make recommendations to a user based on the past behavior of that same user. A more sophisticated approach is to make recommendations based not just on that particular user's past behavior but also on the behavior of other similar users. That approach is called collaborative filtering. Now, there are two general strategies for collaborative filtering: neighborhood methods and latent factor methods. Let's look at each of these in turn. So let's start with neighborhood methods. Here's a user, Joe, who's just watched these three movies. What movie should we recommend to him next? Well, in neighborhood methods, what we do is we find other users who have also watched those three movies and it turns out that there's three of them. Now, all three of them also watched this other movie, "Saving Private Ryan," so that's gonna be our number one recommendation for Joe. Two of them watched this movie "Dune," so that's our number two recommendation for Joe, and one of them watched this movie, "Spider-Man," and so that's gonna be our third recommendation for Joe. Quite straightforward. This is the neighborhood method approach to recommender systems. Now, an alternative approach is latent factor methods. Here, movies and users are embedded in the same low dimensional space. Okay, so in this particular picture, all movies are represented in this two-dimensional space. So for example, "Dumb and Dumber" appears over here, whereas "The Color Purple" appears in the opposite corner of the space. So each movie becomes a two-dimensional point. Likewise, every user is also embedded in this two-dimensional space. So for example, Gus, appears over here and the movies that we're gonna recommend to Gus, the movies that Gus likes, are movies that are close to him in this two-dimensional space. So in particular, we are gonna recommend things like "Independence Day" to him. How do we do this? How do we embed users and movies into a low-dimensional space? Well, one approach to do this is via SVD. So the first step as usual is to produce a large matrix. So in our case, the data consists of existing user ratings and we can assemble these into a matrix. We have a row for each user and we have a column for each movie. And if a user has watched a movie and rated the movie, then the corresponding entry of the matrix is just the user's rating. So for example, the second user gave "Casablanca" a rating of 3. If a user has not seen a movie or has not rated it, then we can just place a 0 in that entry of the matrix. So in this way, we get a truly enormous matrix. And when we get a matrix like this, one of the first questions that arises in our minds is, "Hmm, this is a really big matrix. Maybe we should apply singular value decomposition to it." So what does SVD give us? As usual, we choose some number k, which is relatively small, maybe 10 or 20. And when we take our matrix, M, our enormous matrix, and apply SVD, we get a concise form of that matrix. We get an approximation to that matrix as the product of two much more compact matrixes, a matrix of size n by k and a matrix of size k by p. Here, n is the number of users, and p is the number of movies. So now that we have this concise approximation to the matrix, let's attach interpretations to this approximation; so let's see. Here, we have an n by k matrix, so each row corresponds to a different user and is a k dimensional vector. Let's call these rows u1 through un. And here, let's call the columns w1 through wp. There's a column for each movie and each of these columns is a k dimensional vector. Now, on the right hand side, the ij entry is just ui . wj, and that is an approximation to the ij entry of the original matrix. This gives us an idea, why don't we just embed the ith user as use of i? And why don't we embed the jth matrix, the jth movie, as wj? This gives us an embedding of users as k dimensional vectors and an embedding of movies as k dimensional vectors. And the user's rating of a particular movie is approximately just the dot product of that user's vector and that movie's vector. So let's summarize what we have here. We started by assembling all of the user ratings into a gigantic matrix. Then we applied SVD to this matrix to get a low rank factorization. In this case, a rank k factorization. Once we had this, we decided to think of this as an embedding of both users and movies. The ith row of this matrix is the embedding of the ith user and the jth column of this matrix is the embedding of the jth movie. In this way, both movies and users get mapped into the same k dimensional space. So in this picture, we see the top two dimensions of an embedding found by the Netflix team. I'll let you stare at it briefly. But you can see that over here, we have movies like "Lost in Translation" and "Belle de Jour," artsy movies, and over here we have movies like "The Sound of Music" and "Moonstruck." And over here, we have movies like "Natural Born Killers" and "Scarface." Overall, this looks like a fairly sensible embedding. Okay, so that's it for our overview of singular value decomposition. We've used it as a way of concisely approximating large matrices and we've also seen how it can be used to produce embeddings of data. Later on in this course, we'll look at other methods of producing embeddings, but few of them are as simple or as straightforward as the singular value decomposition. 