(cheerful music) - [Instructor] Welcome back everybody. Now, we have spent a lot of time talking about principal component analysis, which is a form of dimensionality reduction based on linear projection. What underlies PCA is the spectral decomposition of symmetric matrices. What we are gonna do now is to turn to a generalized matrix decomposition, called the singular value decomposition. This is something that's used everywhere. For instance, as a way of obtaining embeddings of data. So let's see what problem it is that we are trying to solve. We start with some matrix M that is potentially enormous. Let's say the size of M, for example, is P by Q. What we want to do is to approximate M in a factored form as the product of two matrices, U and W, where U is a tall, thin matrix of size P by K and W is a short wide matrix of size K by Q. K is some number that we get to choose, and is typically quite small. So we start with this large matrix M, and we want to approximate it as the product of these two much smaller matrices. Why would we want to do this? So first of all, this representation can save a lot of space. Let's say that our original matrix is something very large. Let's say for example, that it is 10,000 by 100,000. This means that the total number of entries in this matrix is 10,000 times 100,000, a billion. This matrix M has a billion entries in it. Now, let's say that we choose K to be something relatively small, like say 10. So now we are approximating our original matrix by a matrix U whose size is 10,000 by 10, and W, whose size is 10 by 100,000. The total number of entries in U is 100,000, and the total number of entries in W is a million. So the overall size of U and W is just a little bit over a million. It is 1000 times smaller than the original matrix. This is a huge help. It can make it possible for us to handle matrices that would otherwise be far too large to store in memory. So the first benefit of this kind of approximation is that it allows us to express very large matrices in a compact form, and thus makes it easier to handle very large matrices. The second benefit is that it gives us a way to embed data, and this is something that we'll see some examples of later on. Now, in expressing a matrix in this way, in this compact factored form, we do end up losing information. The form on the right is just an approximation of the original matrix. And so what we would like to do is to find the optimal approximation, the factored form that loses as little information as possible. One way of doing this is by basing this factorization, U and W, on the singular value decomposition event. This is a generalization of the spectral decomposition that we saw earlier. So let's review a few basic facts about the spectral decomposition. If you recall, this is what we studied when we were looking at principal component analysis. Now, the spectral decomposition works for symmetric matrices. In the case of PCA, we applied it to the covariance matrix of the data, which is always a square symmetric matrix. The spectral decomposition allows us to express this symmetric matrix as the product of three much simpler matrices based on the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix. One of the things we saw is that the eigenvectors are orthonormal, they are unit vectors that are at right angles to each other, and they give us an alternative basis of the space. In a sense, they tell us the natural basis from the point of view of the matrix. The spectral decomposition that results is something that directly gave us principal component analysis. So spectral decomposition is very powerful, but it applies only to symmetric matrices. What if we have an arbitrary matrix, for example, an arbitrary data matrix that's not symmetric and might not even be square. An arbitrary possibly rectangular matrix. For a general matrix, we use the singular value decomposition or SVD. So let's say we have a matrix M of size P by Q. The singular value decomposition of the matrix expresses M exactly as the product of three much simpler matrices. So the first matrix over here is a P by P matrix. Its columns, which we can denote U1, U2, U3, all the way to U sub P are P-dimensional vectors, and they are orthonormal. They have length one and they're at right angles to each other. The second matrix is also P by P. We are gonna call it capital lambda. It is a diagonal matrix, and its entries, sigma one through sigma P are called singular values, and they are all numbers greater than or equal to zero. The final matrix is of size P by Q, and its rows V1 through VP are vectors in Q dimensional space. And they are also orthonormal. So we express M exactly as the product of these three much simpler matrices. Why are they simpler than M? Well, because they're either diagonal, in the case of the middle matrix, or they consist of orthonormal vectors. So let's look a little bit more closely at the singular value decomposition. And let's see that there are actually two different ways in which this is commonly written. So we start with a matrix M, and let's say it's P by Q. So we have a P by Q matrix M. Now the way I'm drawing this, it looks like Q is greater than P. Okay, it looks like a wide matrix. But it could also be the other way around. And all these results will apply equally. So M is a P by Q matrix. What does it mean to use them to define a linear function? What that means is that we would take a vector X and map it to M times X. What kind of a transformation is this? Well, the vector X would have to be a Q-dimensional vector and M times X would then be P-dimensional. So the linear function defined by M maps Q-dimensional space, which in this case is a fairly large dimensional space, to P-dimensional space, which is a little bit smaller. This matrix M essentially operates in two spaces, RQ and RP. So what does it mean to say the natural basis for M? Well, if we are talking about the natural basis for this matrix, we will need a basis both of RP and of RQ. And in fact, this is what's contained in the singular value decomposition. So one way to write the singular value decomposition is as follows. We write M as the product of three matrices, where the first one is P by P, and its columns U1 through UP are an orthonormal basis of P-dimensional space. The second matrix is P by Q. It is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries are the singular values, sigma one through sigma P. This part is zero. And notice that this is a P by Q matrix. So the second part of this matrix is all zeros over here. And finally, we have a third matrix that is Q by Q. And its rows, V1 through VQ, are an ortho normal basis of Q-dimensional space. So M can always be expressed in exactly this form, as a P by P matrix whose columns are a basis of P dimensional space, a diagonal matrix with the singular values of M, and a Q by Q matrix whose rows are a basis of two-dimensional space. So this is one way to express the singular value decomposition. But because the second part of this matrix is all zeros, it turns out that we can actually drop those. And we can also drop the bottom part of this last matrix. And when we do that, we get an entirely equivalent form that looks like this. Once again, we have a P by P matrix with columns U1 through UP. Then we get a diagonal matrix that's P by P with just the singular values along the diagonal. So the first is P by P, the second is P by P. And now we get a matrix in which we drop the last few rows of that last matrix. So we get a matrix of size P by Q whose rows are just V1 through VP. So these are two entirely equivalent ways to express the singular value decomposition. The second one is a little bit more compact, and as a result is sometimes called the thin SVD. How do you obtain the singular value decomposition in practice? Well, you can get it with just one line of Python. And if you're doing that, you do have to tell it which of these two forms you want. For our purposes, it'll always be enough to just use the thin SVD. Okay, so how can we use the singular value decomposition to get a compact approximation of matrix M? Okay, so we have this matrix that's P by Q. And we express it using the SVD as the product of a P by P matrix, a P by P diagonal matrix, and a P by Q matrix. In order to get a concise approximation of this matrix, we start by choosing a value K, sometimes very small. And now what we do is that we just retain the first K columns of this matrix, okay? And we throw the rest away. And we just retain the top K by K submatrix over here. And we just retain the first K rows of this matrix. And so we get an approximation that we'll call M hat that is the product of the columns and submatrices and rows that we've chosen. So it's the product of this P by K matrix, the first K columns of this matrix, this K by K matrix which is this submatrix over here, and this K by Q matrix given by the first K rows over here. And in fact, we can multiply these two together and together they are a K by Q matrix. And so in this way, we take our original matrix M, potentially very large, of size P by Q, and we approximate it. We get this form M hat, which is the product of a matrix that's P by Q with a matrix that's K by Q. Okay, so we get a concise form of our original matrix. Now, in what sense is this a good approximation? So we started with a P by Q matrix. And now we've approximated it by some matrix M hat, which is the product of a P by K matrix and a K by Q matrix. It turns out that this approximation that singular value decomposition gives us is the best possible approximation of the original matrix by a product of this form. The best possible in the sense that it minimizes the square difference between the original matrix and the approximate form. So singular value decomposition gives us an approximate and optimal way of factoring a large matrix in this kind of compact form. Now, this ability to express a matrix more compactly is useful in and of itself, but as we'll see, it's also a great way to get embeddings of data, and that's something that we'll turn to next. 