(upbeat electronic music) (air whooshes) - Welcome back. We'll now see how singular value decomposition, or SVD, gives us a simple way to do topic modeling. Topic modeling is a form of unsupervised learning for text data. The starting point is a collection of documents, and the goal is to automatically discover a set of topics underlying these documents, and to then express each document as a weighted combination of topics. Let's take a look at an example of this. This image is from a paper in which topic modeling was applied to a very large collection of articles from the journal "Science." So the topic modeling algorithm automatically uncovered a collection of topics underlying these articles. Some of the topics are shown over here on the left. Each topic is given by some of the keywords in that topic. The first topic, for example, has keywords like gene and DNA and genetic. This topic is, needless to say, genetics. The second topic has keywords like life, evolve, organism. This topic is evolution. The third topic has keywords like brain, neuron, nerve. This seems to be a neuroscience topic. The fourth topic has keywords like data, number, computer. This topic seems to be computer science, and in this way, many, many other topics were also recovered. It's quite remarkable that these topics were discovered in a completely unsupervised way from this collection of articles. Now, once these topics had been discovered, each document, each science article was expressed as a weighted combination of topics. So here, for example, is a particular article, and it turned out that this article is a mix of three topics: genetics, evolution, and computer science. The genetics part of the topic shows up in words in yellow, like genes, and genomes, and sequenced. The evolution words in the document show up in words in pink, like survive and organism. And the computer science aspect of this document shows up in the words that are highlighted in blue, like predictions and computational. So this document is a mixture of three topics, a mix of genetics, evolution, and computer science. It can therefore be represented in a compact form, shown on the right, as a mix of these three topics. And this gives us an alternative representation of the document, a representation that is quite meaningful, that has a lot of semantic value. So what can we do with these new representation of documents? How does it help us to be able to represent a document as a weighted combination of topics? Well, this has been used in many ways. For example, it can be used in textual analysis to, for example, look at how hot topics change over time. Many scholars in the humanities, for instance, have used topic modeling to study how linguistic style evolves over time. Another way of using this representation is as a nice form in which to do similarity search. Let's say, for example, that I read an article that I enjoy and I wanna find other similar articles. One way to do this is to do nearest neighbor search in this space, in the space of topic representations. That would recover other articles that have a similar balance of topics. It's a very useful way in which to use this representation. So topic modeling really seems like it has many uses, but how can we do it? How can we start with a collection of documents and automatically recover the underlying topics, and, moreover, express the documents as combination of these topics? It turns out that one way to do it, one of the earliest proposals and one of the simplest proposals is to simply use singular value decomposition. When singular value decomposition is used for this purpose, it is called Latent Semantic Indexing, or LSI. Let's see how this works. So our starting point is a large corpus of documents. Let's say we have n documents. For example, science articles, or Shakespeare's plays, or some other corpus of text documents. We start by fixing a vocabulary of words. This could, for example, consist of 50,000 English words. We then represent each document by simply counting the number of times each of these words appears in the document. So for example, let's say that our first document has four occurrences of the word cat, one occurrence of the word dog, zero occurrences of the word boat, and so on. We thus represent this document as a vector of length V, where this vector has one entry for each of the words in our vocabulary, and counts the number of times that word occurs in the document. In this way, we summarize our corpus by an enormous matrix, a matrix of size n by V, a matrix that has one row for each document and one column for each of the words in our vocabulary. How can we use this for topic modeling? Well, we have an enormous matrix. Let's try to find a concise factored form of this matrix using singular value decomposition. So when we apply SVD to our large matrix, M, M is a matrix that is of size n by V, n rows, one per document, V columns, one per word. When we apply SVD to this matrix, we approximate it as the product of two much smaller matrices, a matrix theta of size n by k, and a matrix psi of size k by V. And here k is something that we get to choose, and we'll make it something small. Maybe a hundred, for example. So the SVD automatically gives us this factored approximation to our enormous matrix. Now, when we look at these two matrices, we find that, in fact, they give us a topic modeling, in a sense. So let's look at this second matrix over here. It has k rows. Each row is a V dimensional vector, okay? So let's look at the first row. It's a V dimensional vector, so it's got an entry for every word. Hmm, we can think of this row as being a topic. The entries with large values are the keywords in that topic, so we will think of this first row as being topic number one. Likewise, the second row is our second topic, topic number two. After all, it's a vector of length V with one entry per word, and the entries that are large are gonna be the keywords in that topic. And so in this way, we can interpret this matrix psi as telling us k underlying topics. Now let's move to the first matrix, theta. This has got N rows, one per document. Okay, so for example, let's look at the first row. This is a vector of size k. It's a very short vector. Remember, we were thinking of k as being something like a hundred. So what theta one is doing is approximating the first document as a linear combination of these k topics. This first number in the vector is the weight of the first topic. The second number is the weight of the second topic. The third number is the weight of the third topic, and the last number is the weight of the kth topic. So each of these rows tells us how to express the corresponding document as a weighted combination of topics. So let's summarize what we have. We started by building an enormous matrix from our corpus of documents. This matrix is of size n by V. There's a row reach document and a column for each word. It's a truly enormous matrix. Then we apply SVD to get a low rank approximation of this matrix. SVD just gives us these two matrices, an n by k matrix theta, and a k by V matrix psi. So SVD hands us those two matrices, and then we interpret these two matrices as a topic model. We think of the second matrix as giving us the k topics. The first row, psi one, is the first topic. The last row, psi k, is the kth topic. So in particular, the jth row, psi sub j, is a vector of length V, and it tells us what the jth topic is. The coefficient psi sub jw is large if the word w is important for this topic. So this matrix over here gives us k topics, and this other matrix, theta, expresses each document as a linear combination of topics. The ith row over here, theta sub i, corresponds to the ith document, and the jth coordinate of that row, theta sub ij, tells us the weight of the jth topic in that particular document. So we get this concise, semantic representation of documents that we can subsequently use for many different purposes. We can use it for textual analysis. We can use it as a meaningful space in which to do similarity search, or we can use it as a representation for documents that we will later use for supervised learning. And we get this concise semantic representation almost effortlessly from singular value decomposition. 