(bright music) - Okay, we have formally defined Bayes nets also known as directed graphical models, and we've seen how these models can be used to answer queries. That is to do inference. But how do we learn these models from data? It turns out that there are several cases to consider. The simplest case of all is when the structure of the base net is fixed in advance and all the variables are fully observable. Let's say for example that we want to learn the joint distribution over five variables, and we know that the base net structure looks like this. How would we know this? Well, often we have information about the causal relationships between the variables that allow us to specify the structure. All that remains to be done then is to infer the conditional probability functions. Now, let's say that we have the ability to sample to get data observations and all variables are observable. So each observation, each data point gives us the values of all five variables. How can we use this kind of data to infer the conditional probability functions? So let's see. In this case, for example, one of the conditional probability functions that we need is the function for X four which is the probability distribution of X four given its two parents X two and X three. Now let's say for simplicity that the variables are all binary. So then there are four choices for the values of X two and X three. They could be 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, or 1, 1. And in each of these cases we want to know what is the probability that X four is one given this particular setting of X two and X three? So inferring the conditional probability function means filling in these four numbers over here. How do we do that? Well, we can do it quite simply based on empirical counts. We generate a bunch of data points, we collect a bunch of data. Let's say we wanna fill in this value over here, we look at the data points for which X two and X three are both zero. For what fraction of those points is X four equal to one? We just fill in that fraction right here. And similarly, we can fill in these other three values as well. So it's quite straightforward. In the case where the structure of the graph is known beforehand and all the variables are observable, finding the maximum likelihood setting of the conditional probability functions is quite easy. Now the next case of interest is where the structure is fixed in advance but some of the variables are hidden. When would this happen? Well, for example this is what happens with mixtures of gaussians. So let's say that the data distribution looks something like this. So we have data X and it's just one dimensional and its distribution looks something like this. It's a mixture of three gaussians. So there's one Gaussian, let's say with parameters mu one and sigma one squared. That occurs a fraction by one of the time. There's another Gaussian with parameters mu two and sigma two squared. That occurs a fraction by two of the time. And then there's a third Gaussian with parameters mu three and sigma sub three squared and that occurs a fraction by three of the time. Now these fractions by one, by two and by three have to add up to one on, and all we get to see are these X values. We never find out which Gaussian each of these Xs came from. So the way we can represent this situation is to say that X is the thing we actually get to observe but it depends on this hidden variable Z that tells us which Gaussian X came from. We never get to see Z. Z takes on values one, two, or three. The probability that Z takes on value J is exactly pice of J. Okay, so for example, the probability that we get a point from the first Gaussian is pice of one. And once we know what Gaussian we are choosing from, once we know that the Gaussian is Gaussian number J then the probability of X is just given by the parameters of that particular Gaussian. The issue is that we never get to see Z. We just get all these X's, and nonetheless we wanna fit a model of this type to the data. How do we do this? The base net has two variables, X and Z and we only get to see X. It turns out that there's a very nice algorithm for this called the EM algorithm which we'll see a bit later in the class. Nonetheless, this estimation problem is NP hard which means that we can't always get the very best answer. Now, a third case of interest is when we don't know the structure of the base net in advance and we want to infer the best possible structure. This turns out to be an NP hard problem. Now, as usual, there are some special cases that are tractable. For example, if we want to infer a base net that's actually a tree, then finding the best tree finding the maximum likelihood tree is something that is efficiently solvable. In fact, it boils down to a minimum spanning creek computation. But for more general base nets there are various heuristics we resort to and it's a slightly harder problem. Okay, so let's summarize some of the basic properties of Bayes nets. They can capture any probability distribution even with arbitrarily complicated dependencies. In other words, they are extremely flexible and extremely expressive. They have a nice factored form that's intuitive and in fact, often reflects the causal dependencies between the random variables. Because of this, we often use them as a pictorial language by which we can specify families of probability models. Now, what about the algorithmic status of base nets? Can we sample from a distribution represented by a Bayes net? Yes, actually, we can do it very easily. Let's say for example that we have a Bayes net that looks like this. How can we sample from this distribution from this distribution over four variables? Well, we first sample X one from its distribution. Then we sample X two from its conditional distribution given X one. Then we sample X three, and then we sample X four from its conditional distribution given X two and X three. So it's very easy to sample a joint vector, X one, X two, X three, X four. We simply have to sample the individual variables in a suitable order. Now, the other thing that's very easy with Bayes nets is computing the likelihood or the density or probability of a specific point, X one, X two, X three, X four. We have a nice formula for it, the factored form of the Bayes net. What about inference? Well, we've seen that in general inference is hard but there are many cases in which we can do exact inference and in other cases we can use approximate methods. And finally, when it comes to learning, again it depends on the specific case we're dealing with. So in summary are Bayes nets suitable for density estimation? Yes, they are. They're a great way of doing density estimation. We can use them to model any probability distribution and once we do that, then for any specific X, we can get the density at X easily just by using the factored form of the distribution. Are they good for generation of data that is for sampling? Yes, we've seen that in fact it's easy to sample from a Bayes net. What about representation learning? Do Bayes nets give us a new and alternative representation of the data? No, they don't. So it's not suitable for that particular purpose. Okay, so that's it for our whirlwind overview of Bayes nets. What we'll do next time is to see a way in which they're commonly combined with neural nets in what are called neural auto regressive models. 