(bright music) - Welcome back, we have been talking about multivariate distributions. That is distributions over several random variables. Now, the multivariate distribution that's the simplest to use is undoubtedly the multivariate Gaussian which we've already seen. But the Gaussian doesn't allow us to model arbitrary dependencies between variables. For instance, the Gaussian doesn't let us model dependencies between triples of variables: something like if X goes up and Y goes down, then Z goes up. In order to model more complicated dependencies like this, we now turn to Bayes' nets. These are sometimes also called directed graphical models. So a lot of the foundational work on probabilistic reasoning for AI was done by Judea Pearl in the 1980s. And much of this work is summarized in his book, "Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems." This book is now something of a classic. And in fact, it's so widely read that even the examples in the book have become classics and are often referred to by name and taught in classes. Let's go through one of these examples called the Alarm example. So here's the premise. Mr. Holmes receives a call from his neighbor, Dr. Watson, who states that he hears the sound of a burglar alarm from the direction of Mr. Holmes' house. While preparing to rush home, Mr. Holmes recalls that Dr. Watson is known to be a tasteless practical joker. Hmm, this is a situation with a lot of uncertainty. How do we model this? So it seems like the uncertainty can be boiled down to three random variables. The first is did the burglary take place or not? Let's call that B, okay? So B is either 0 or 1. If a burglary occurred, B equals 1. If not, B equals 0. Now, this is the random variable that Mr. Holmes really cares about, but it's not something that he can observe directly. The second random variable is did the alarm go off or not? There's also uncertainty about this. And again, this is a binary random variable, 0 or 1. And the third random variable is does Watson call or not? This is the only random variable that Mr. Holmes actually gets to observe. So these three random variables capture the entire situation. And in Bayes' nets, the first thing we do is to draw a graph that represents the causal relationships between these variables. So the most basic variable is B. Is there a burglary or not? Depending on whether there is a burglary, the alarm may or may not go off. And depending on whether the alarm goes off or not, Watson may or may not call. So this graph captures the causal structure of this situation, and what it tells us is that the joint distribution of these variables, A, B, and W, the joint distribution of these three binary variables is the probability of B, the distribution of B by itself, okay? Times the probability of A given B times the probability of W given A. So the joint distribution of these three variables takes on this form. Now, in order to fully specify the distribution, we actually need to instantiate each of these individual conditional distributions. So let's start with the distribution of B. B is a binary variable. It's either 0 or 1. So in order to specify the distribution, all we need to say is what is the probability that B equals 1? What is the probability of a burglary? Let's say that in this neighborhood, the probability that B equals 1 is 10 to the -4, 1/10,000. Okay, now we move on to the next distribution. This is the conditional distribution of A given B, okay? The distribution of the alarm going off given whether or not a burglary has occurred. Now here there are two choices for B. B could be 0 or 1. And in each of those two situations, the alarm may or may not go off. So we capture the distribution using this table. So if B equals 0, if there is no burglary, let's say that there's still a 1% chance that the alarm goes off, okay? It's not a very good alarm. And if there is a burglary, then there's a much higher chance that the alarm goes off. There's a 95% chance that the alarm is activated. So this table over here gives us the conditional probability distribution of A given B. We call this a conditional probability table, okay? The table gives us the conditional probability distribution. The final conditional probability distribution we need is the distribution of W given A. So now there are two choices for A. A could be 0 or 1. And in each of those two situations, we need the distribution of W, the probability that W is 1. Let's say that if the alarm goes off, Watson will definitely call. There's a 100% chance that he will call. But even if the alarm does not go off, Watson, who has a strange sense of humor, may still call with a .1 probability. Now that we have these individual conditional probabilities, we can put them together using this equation over here and this gives us the probability of any configuration, A, B, W. For instance, let's see, what is the probability that there is no burglary but the alarm goes off and Watson calls? Well, let's see. The probability of no burglary is 1 - 10 to the -4. Okay, what is the probability of alarm, given no burglary? Well, that's this value over here. Without a burglary, there's still a .01 chance of the alarm going off. And what's the probability that W equals 1 given A equals 1? Well, it's this number over here, so it's 1.0. So overall, we get something that's just a little bit less than 1%. So this particular configuration, no burglary but alarm goes off and Watson calls, has approximately a 1% chance of occurring. And in the same way, we can compute the probability of any other configuration, A, B, W. Now things get a little bit more complicated. Let's see what happens. As Mr. Holmes is preparing to leave his office, he recalls that his daughter is scheduled to arrive home at any minute. If greeted by an alarm sound, she probably would phone him for instructions. Hmm, so there's a new random variable now, whether or not the daughter calls. Let's call it D. Again, it's a binary random variable, either she calls or not. Where does this random variable fit into our graph? Okay, so we have the burglary. And depending on the status of the burglary, the alarm either goes off or does not go off. Depending on the status of the alarm, Watson may or may not call. And depending on the status of the alarm, the daughter may or may not call. So the daughter's behavior depends only on whether the alarm is going off or not, regardless of what's happening with Watson or the actual burglary. So this is our new graph. And from this graph, what we get is that the joint distribution of A, B, D, and W, the joint distribution of these four variables is the probability of B times the probability of A given B times the probability of W given A times the probability of D given A. Now we have most of this information. The only distribution we are missing is this very last one, the one that captures the behavior of the daughter. And let's say that that conditional probability distribution is given by this table, by this conditional probability table, or short form CPT, okay? So that last distribution is captured by this conditional probability table. If the alarm is not going off, the daughter is not gonna call. And if the alarm is going off, there is a .7 chance, a 70% chance that the daughter will call. With that additional CPT, we now get the full joint distribution over these four variables. Now, let's say that there is yet another complication. Let's see what it is. As he is debating whether or not to rush home, Mr. Holmes remembers reading in the instruction manual of his alarm system that the device is sensitive to earthquakes and can accidentally be triggered by one. Uh oh, so there's yet another random variable, E, did an earthquake occur? Okay, so what's the new graph? So there's the alarm and now there are two things that can influence whether the alarm goes off. There's the burglary, but the alarm can also be set off by an earthquake. Now, the status of the alarm influences what Watson does and also influences what the daughter does. So this is the new structure of our problem and what this tells us is that the joint distribution of these variables, of A, B, D, E, W is the probability of B, the probability of burglary times the probability of E, whether or not an earthquake took place, times the probability of the alarm given B and E times the probability of W given A times the probability of D given A. This graph tells us that the joint distribution over these five variables has this particular factored form. Now, in order to actually specify the distribution, we need all of these individual conditional probability functions. We already have this. What about this? What is the probability of an earthquake? Let's say that the particular neighborhood in which Holmes lives is prone to earthquakes, and the probability of an earthquake is say 1%. Okay good, we have that. We have this one already. We already know the probability that the daughter will call given the status of the alarm. What we now need is this. What is the probability that the alarm goes off given the status of B and E? Now, B is binary. E is binary. So there's a total of four possibilities. You could have 0 0, 0 1, 1 0, and 1 1. And in each of these four cases, we need to know the probability that the alarm goes off. So we get a CPT with four entries, okay? We have four entries because there are four cases for B and E. So this last piece of information gives us all we need to fully specify the joint distribution over these five variables. Okay, so let's step back and see what just happened. We had a situation in which there was a lot of uncertainty. We wrote down five random variables where one of them, burglary, is the thing that Mr. Holmes cares the most about. But there are these four other random variables as well. We drew a graph that captured the causal relationships between these five variables, and the structure of that graph told us that the joint distribution over all five variables has to look like this. In order to precisely specify the joint distribution, we then supplied each of these individual probability functions. Each of them was a little table of some kind. Okay, so that's it for our initial example of a Bayes' net. Now that we've been through a simple example, what we'll do next time is to go ahead and formalize the notion of Bayes' net. 