(inspiring music) - Last time we went through a simple example of a Bayes net. Now that we've done that, let's go ahead and formally define these things. So let's say that we have a collection of random variables X1 through Xn, and we want a joint distribution over these random variables. One way to do it is via a Bayes net. So a Bayes net is specified by a directed acyclic graph, or DAG, over these variables. This is a graph that has a node for each of the random variables. So a node for X1, a node for X2 and so on and has edges that represent dependencies between the variables or causal relationships between the variables. Now the graph has to be acyclic, which means that it can have no directed cycles. Here we have a simple example of a graph over five variables X1 through X5. Now the parent of each node is the set of variables that point to it. So for example, the parents of X5 are X3 and X4 we'll say that pi sub 5, that is the parents of X5 are X3 and X4. Likewise, the parents of X4 are X2 and X3. And the parents of X2, well, there's just one parent X1. What about the parents of X3? Well, there are no edges into X3, so X3 has no parents, we have the empty set and likewise, X1 has no parents, the empty set again. Now what this graph tells us is that the joint distribution over these variables, X1, X2, X3, X4, X5 can be factored in the following form. It's the distribution of X1 times the distribution of X2 given X1 times the probability of X3 times the probability of X4 given X2 and X3 times the probability of X5 given X3 and X4. So writing down the graph tells us that the sort of distributions that we're considering are distributions that have this particular factored form. Notice that this is not completely general. It is not the case that every distribution looks like this. What we do know is that always it is the case that the probability of X1 through X5 is equal to the probability of X1 times the probability of X2 given X1 times the probability of X3 given X1 and X2 times the probability of X4 given X1, X2 and X3 times the probability of X5 given X1, X2, X3 and X4. This is always the case. That's just the chain rule of probability. But when we write down this graph what we are seeing is that we are looking at a slightly more limited clause of distributions. We are looking at distributions that have this simpler factored form. For instance, we have the probability of X1 and we have the probability of X2 given X1. But when we are doing X3, we don't have to look at X1 and X2. And when we are doing X4, we don't need to look at X1. And when we are doing X5, we don't need to look at X1 and X2. So we have a slightly simpler form than the fully general form that we see over here. More generally, if we are modeling a distribution over n random variables then we have a directed acyclic graph with these n nodes, with these n variables. And the distributions we're considering are distributions that have this factored form where the joint distribution of X1 through Xn is the distribution of X1 given its parents times the probability of X2 given its parents all the way to the probability of Xn given its parents. So to reiterate, a Bayes net is given by a DAG and the DAG represents a family of probability distributions. It represents the distributions that factor over the DAG, distributions that have that nice factored form where the joint distribution of X1 through Xn is the distribution of X1 given its parents times X2 given its parents times X3 given its parents and so on. So let's look at some basic questions. Question number one "Is there some DAG that is fully general, that can in fact capture all probability distributions over n variables? Yes, there is. We know that it's always the case that the probability of X1 through Xn is equal to the probability of X1 times the probability of X2 given X1 times the probability of X3 given X1 and X2 and so on. Where for each variable we condition on all the earlier variables. We can draw a DAG that corresponds to this, okay? So we have X1 by itself, it doesn't need any parents. X2 has parent X1, so we have this. X3 has parents X1 and X2, so it looks like this. X4's parents are all the other variables so far, so it looks like this. X5's parents are all the other variables so far, so it looks like this. This is a complete DAG. There are no edges we can add to this without producing a cycle. And this DAG can represent all possible distributions over the n variables. Now, usually we would not use this DAG because it turns out that some of these distributions, for example the distribution of Xn given all the previous variables can be quite complicated to specify. Okay, so let's move on to question number two. "If the Xis take on finitely many values what additional information beyond the graph do we need to specify a probability distribution?" So the graph only tells us that the distribution has a particular factored form. It tells us that the joint distribution of X1 through Xn is equal to the distribution of X1 given its parents times the distribution of X2 given its parents and so on, all the way to the probability of Xn given its parents. In order to fully specify a probability distribution we need to say what each of these individual conditional probability distributions is. And one way to do that is to give a little table for each of these. What is the size of this table? Well, let's say that all the variables are binary. Let's say that all the Xi are binary, then the CPTs, the conditional probability tables, have what size? Well, let's look at this one. So X1 is binary. All we need to talk about is the probability that X1 equals one. And we need to do this for every conceivable setting of its parents. Well, let's say it has five parents. So the number of settings of its parents are two to the five, okay? Its parents are binary. So the CPT for X1 has size 2 raised to the power of the number of parents of X1. What about the CPT for X2? Well, again, 2, raised to the power of the number of parents of X2 all the way to 2 raised to the power of the number of parents of Xn. So you can see that if we are gonna do things this way, if we're gonna specify these conditional probabilities using tables those tables can get pretty large when nodes have lots of parents. So if we are doing that we will typically restrict the number of parents of each node. Now let's look at a concrete example of a Bayes net that was used to capture a certain segment of medical knowledge. So this is a Bayes net that was developed in the late '80s and early '90s. It is called the QMR network where QMR stands for quick medical reference. So this is a very large Bayes net. It has about 4,600 nodes, 4,000 of which correspond to symptoms and 600 correspond to diseases, okay? So the disease nodes are shown at the bottom, these are things like flu, hepatitis and so on. And the symptom nodes are shown at the top, these are things like fever, cough, et cetera. So there's 4,000 of these and there's 600 of these. It's a very large net. Now at the bottom we have the diseases, there are no connections between them. At the top we have the symptoms and each symptom has edges coming into it from all the diseases that could conceivably produce that symptom. This Bayes net gives us a joint distribution over all 4,600 variables. It tells us the probability of any particular configuration of diseases and symptoms. And in particular, it tells us that this joint distribution has this nice factored form. So all the variables are binary. The probability of any configuration of all the ds and fs is the probability of disease 1 times the probability of the disease 2 variable times the probability of the disease 3 variable. So the product of the disease values, the product of those probabilities, okay? Times for each symptom, the probability of the status of that symptom given the status of the diseases that could produce that symptom. So we know that the joint distribution has this nice factored form. Now, how much space do we need to write down this joint distribution? Well, let's see, let's start with these. For each individual disease, such as hepatitis, we need to know the probability of that disease occurring. That's just one real number. Okay, so that's very simple. Now, let's move on to these. For each symptom we need to know the conditional probability distribution of that symptom, given all the diseases, given the status of all the diseases that could produce that symptom. Now, if we look at a symptom like fever what diseases could produce fever? Well, pretty much all the diseases. So f1 in this case probably has 600 parents. Any of the diseases could produce fever. In which case the number of configurations of the parents is 2 to the 600. So writing down a conditional probability table for fever given the status of the diseases would be completely infeasible. It would be a table of size 2 to the 600. So what the creators of this Bayes net did was to use something more specialized for these conditional probability functions. Something whose size was a lot closer to 600 than to 2 to the 600. They used something called a noisy-OR function. So let's see what that is. Okay, so here we have a collection of binary variables, everything, zero one. And here at the top we have some particular symptom, let's say fever, and pointing to it are all the diseases that could conceivably produce that symptom, okay? So let's say we have flu, malaria, et cetera, et cetera. And we wanna specify the joint distribution of Y. We wanna specify the distribution of Y given the configuration of all these variables. Now, since Y is binary we just need to say what is the probability that Y is one? Given all these variables, or equivalently what is the probability that Y is zero given all these variables? The distribution that was used is a noisy-OR, it is a distribution with just a few parameters, Lambda, which is just one offset parameter, and then just a single number for each of the Xs. So we have p1, p2, and so on. So if there's 600 parents, the total number of parameters is just 601, and the distribution has the following form, the conditional probability that Y is zero given all of the parents' values follows this formula. Okay, so let's try and understand this a little bit. What this is saying. What is the lambda? So lambda is the probability of getting this symptom even in the absence of any disease. So lambda is the probability that Y equals one, the probability of having fever, even in the absence of any of these diseases, it's the probability the Y equals one when all the disease nodes are off. Now, once we add in a few diseases, the probability of fever is clearly gonna go up. And so what this formula tells us is that each Xi equals one, bumps up the chance of disease, and therefore decreases the probability that Y equals zero. So it decreases the probability that Y equals zero by a multiplicative factor, a factor of one minus p sub i. And so we have a nice simple and intuitive distribution, okay? So we have a nice conditional probability distribution where what we've essentially asserted is that the various diseases act independently towards producing the symptom, okay? Now this is called a noisy-OR distribution because it is a generalization of the logical OR. Hmm, how would we make Y behave like the OR of X1, X2, X3, X4? What settings of lambda and p1, p2 et cetera would assure that? Okay, so to get a logical OR, if we want Y to simply be the logical OR of X1, X2, and so on, what do we do? Well, we set lambda equal to one and we set all the pi to zero. And then you could check that in fact this will force Y to simply be the OR of the Xs. That is to say if all the Xs are off, then Y will be zero. And if even one of the Xs is on, then Y will be one. Okay, so we have formally defined Bayes nets, and we've looked at some ways to specify the conditional probability functions in the net. What we'll do next is to look at ways in which Bayes nets can be used. 