(gentle music) - We have talked a lot about the base net formalism. Now we look at a way in which base nets are often combined with neural nets to get what are called neural auto regressive models. So let's say that we want to model a joint distribution over d-dimensional data. So we have data points X with features X one through Xd, and we want to model the joint distribution over these variables. We want a multi-variate distribution for X. So the first step is to pick an ordering of the variables and then what we'll do is that our model will say that the distribution of X the probability of X is simply the probability of the first variable in the ordering times the probability of the second variable given the first times the probability of the third variable given the first two and so on and so forth, all the way till the very last variable. Given all the preceding variables This is a completely general factored form. Now, in order to realize a model like this, we have to specify these conditional probability distributions. So most generally, we have to specify the conditional probability distribution for the i-th variable in the list given all of the preceding variables. Now, one way we could do this is by writing down a conditional probability table but that would rapidly become impractical when I is large. So instead, one thing we can do is to specify each of these by a neural net. Let's see how that works out. So one of the simplest models of this kind is called NADE, or neural auto regressive density estimation. NADE is for the specific case where the variables are binary where each variable is zero one. And so in order to specify the conditional distribution of the i-th variable, given the I minus one variables earlier in the ordering all we have to do is to specify the probability that that variable is one given the values of these other variables. So we do that using a neural net. The input to the net is the value of the first variable the value of the second variable all the way to the value of the I minus first variable. These get passed through several hidden layers potentially and then we have a single output unit. And this output unit gives us a probability the probability that the i-th variable equals one. Given all of these preceding variables, how do we get that last node to output a value in the range zero to one? Well, we simply use a sigmoid gate. Okay, so what this means is that for each feature for each X of I, we have a neural net. So we have a total of D neural nets, which sounds like quite a lot of parameters, and indeed it is. So it's common to actually tie weights to reduce the number of parameters. For instance, in this particular paper this model was applied to the MNIST dataset. If you recall, MNIST consists of images that are 28 by 28 and are gray scale. So the first step was to binarize these images to round the values, to zero to one and then each image consisted of a vector of 784 pixels. So the way the joint distribution looked was the distribution over X one, just by itself. The distribution over X two, conditional on X one the distribution over X three, conditional on X one and X two. And finally the distribution over X 784 conditional on the first 783 pixels. Each of these distributions was realized using a neural net with a single hidden layer containing 500 units and the parameters were tied together to reduce the overall number of weights. Okay, so this works for binary data. How do we deal with non-binary variables? How can this method be extended to the non-binary case? So let's say for example, that we want to model the distribution of the i-th variable, given the first I minus one variables, and this time the data is not binary. Well, the many cases, so for example, let's say that this variable takes on K values. In that case, one possibility would be to have a neural net as before, which takes all the preceding values, puts them through some hidden layers, and now the output layer consists of K units. And to get a distribution over them, we use a soft max. Another situation is where The i-th variable has a real value. What could we do? Then we wanna specify a distribution over this variable. Well, now again, we would have all the inputs as before and maybe several hidden layers. And now for the out output what we could do is to simply have two outputs which are the mean and variance of a Gaussian. So the conditional distribution takes the form of a Gaussian. That would be a simple option. There are lots of other cases. For example, let's say X sigmas of I is a positive integer. Well then we could specify a distribution over it in which case we would have a structure like this. But now the final layer would just have a single node giving the mean of a distribution. Okay, so let's return to NADE, and it was applied to MNIST. And here are some samples from the resulting distribution. As we've seen, it's very simple to sample from a base net or equivalently from an auto regressive model. Here are some of the images that were produced. They are pretty good, but they're also not great. And so one question is, how does one evaluate a generative model like this? How are we supposed to just look at these images and assess whether they're any good or not? This is actually a challenging question, and in many ways, it's an open question that people are still grappling with today. But just to give you one example one possibility is to simply use log likelihood on a held out set of data. So in this case, for example maybe the original nets were trained on some fraction of the MNIST dataset, and the held out part could be used to evaluate the log likelihood of this model. Now, let's turn to another very successful auto-regressive model called WaveNet. And this is a model that generates raw audio at a fairly high sampling rate, 16,000 samples per second. So the samples are generated one at a time. And to generate the sample number T the previous samples are fed in T minus one, T minus two, T minus three all the way to T minus some large window size capital T. Okay, so these are all fed in at the bottom of a neural net and the output is a distribution over the next sample, X of T. Okay, now there are several challenges over here. The key challenge is because the output sampling rate is fairly high this capital T has to be extremely large at least in the thousands. And so the input layer is very wide. Now, it is desirable to use a convolutional structure that is to have the same unit repeated over and over again. But a naive way of doing this would require the network to have large depth. Okay, so look at the way things are done over here. This node contains information from the previous two times steps. This node contains information from the previous three times steps. This node contains information from the previous four times steps. If we continue in this way, the depth of this network would have to be something like capital T which would be impractical. So instead, a slightly different scheme is used. Now we see that this node contains information from the past two times steps. This is information from the past four times steps. This is information from the past eight times steps and so on. And in this way, we are able to achieve a depth that looks only like log T which permits a much larger value a much larger window size to be used. There were several other interesting choices and innovations in the design of this net. So for instance, each of the outputs each sample X of T, is a real value. So one option would be to have the output distribution be for example, Gaussian for the output to produce say the mean and variance of a Gaussian and have X of T be a sample from that Gaussian. Instead, these researchers found that a better idea was to simply discretized the output space instead of thinking of it as arbitrary real numbers to discretized it into 256 values arranged on a log scale. And therefore, to have an output unit that was simply a soft max over 256 possibilities that turned out to work a lot better than having Gaussian outputs. Now, it turns out that this model is very good for text to speech that is for converting text into speech. When it's used in that way, it's called conditional generation and the input now has to be augmented. It cannot consist simply of the last few sound samples but also contains information about the text to be spoken more precisely specific information about the current phoning being uttered and various other sound parameters. Okay, so that's it for our discussion of neuro auto regressive models. We've seen that these models have been successful at capturing some rather complex distributions. The model themselves are large, but the principles underlying them are really quite simple. 