(calm music) - Welcome back. We have talked about the multi-variate Gaussian and about many of its remarkable properties. We could spend a lot more time on the multivariate Gaussian and indeed it would be time well spent. But instead what we are gonna do is to shift gears a little bit and talk about an infinite dimensional generalization of the multivariate Gaussian. It is called the Gaussian process. So let's start with a concrete application. Let's say that what we want to do is to construct a pollution map for San Diego County, which is where I happen to live. Now, if we think of the county as a square, as say the grid zero one squared what we want is a pollution level at every point in this grid every one of the infinitely many points in the grid. Now, the only data we have consists of pollution values at a few selected locations. These are either fixed county facilities or maybe homes of individual citizens who happen to have installed pollution sensors. So based on this scant finite data what we want is a dense pollution map. We want predictions of pollution at every point in this grid. In fact, we don't just want predictions, but we also want to know the uncertainty in those predictions. That is for every point in the space we want a distribution over possible pollution levels. How can we do this? So here's an idea. Although this grid contains infinitely many points let's say we just choose, say a thousand points in the grid, including the points at which we are able to measure pollution. So we pick these thousand points let's call them X one through X 1000. These are points in our grid. Now, we wanna model pollution levels at these points. Let's call the pollution levels F of X one through F of X a thousand. These values are a 1000 dimensional vector. What we can do is to model the distribution over these vectors by a thousand dimensional Gaussian so we can fit a Gaussian distribution to these thousand dimensional vectors. Now, we are able to measure pollution values at select locations, at the locations corresponding to the red dots. That is we are able to measure selected features in this 1000 dimensional vector. Based on those features we can look at the conditional distribution of the remaining features using our conditioning formula for the multivariate Gaussian. And in this way, we can get a distribution over pollution values at all of the remaining locations out of these 1000 locations. That sounds like it might work but we actually wanted predictions over the entire county not just at a thousand locations. Well, if a thousand is not enough we could pick 10,000 locations. Then we would be dealing with 10,000 dimensional vectors and we'd have a 10,000 dimensional Gaussian which captures the distributions over these vectors. If that wasn't enough, we could go to a hundred thousand or a million. In fact, why don't we just go to the limit? Why don't we pick all locations in this grid so that we get a vector that's infinitely long, equivalently we get a function that gives us a value at every point in this grid. So with that intuition in mind let's go ahead and formally define a Gaussian process. So our starting point is that we choose an input space. Let's call it script X. In our example the space was just the grid zero one squared. Now, the Gaussian process is a distribution over all functions on X. And as we said, one convenient way of thinking of a function is just as an infinitely long vector, a vector that gives the function value at every single point in X. Now, a Gaussian process has the following property although we have an infinitely large space X, let's go ahead and choose any finite number of locations in X. Let's say we choose S locations, call them X one through Xs. Then the value of the function at those locations is F of X one through F of Xs, and this is an dimensional vector. It turns out that this vector will have a Gaussian distribution. In particular, a Gaussian process has two parameters. It is parameterized by a mean function. M, which is a function from X to R. The mean function tells us the average value of the function at every point in the input space. In our example the mean function would give us the average pollution level at every point in San Diego County. We also have a Covariance function which takes two locations and gives the covariance between the function values at those locations. In our example the covariance functions would take any two locations in San Diego County and give the covariance between the pollution values at those two specific locations. Now, if we choose any finite set of locations say X one through Xs, what is the distribution over function values at those locations? Or in our example, what is the distribution over pollution values at those locations? Well, the values at those locations are F of X one through F of Xs. It's an X dimensional vector. And what we've said is that this vector has a Gaussian distribution. What Gaussian exactly? Well, it comes from the Gaussian whose mean is just the mean value at location X one, the average pollution value at X one all the way to the mean value at Xs and whose covariance is given by this covariance function K. So it's the covariance K applied to X one X one all the way to X one Xs. It's the S by S matrix where the IJ entry of the matrix is the K function. The covariance function applied to locations Xi Xj. And so the bottom right entry is Xs Xs. So if we pick a finite number of locations, say S locations, the function values at those locations follow a Gaussian distribution and the parameters of the Gaussian can be read off from the mean function and the covariance function. So a Gaussian process is parameterized by these two functions and we often use the shorthand GP M K to denote the Gaussian process with that specific mean function and that specific covariance function. Okay, this is all rather abstract. So let's look at a concrete example. So let's say we have a Gaussian process in which the input space is R. What that means is that the Gaussian process gives us a distribution over all functions on the line. So imagine any function on the line. Imagine all possible functions. The Gaussian process is a distribution over all these functions. Let's look at the Gaussian process. Whose mean function and covariance function are these? The mean function is identically zero, it's zero everywhere and the covariance function follows this formula. So we have our input space X, which is the real line and let's say we just pick three specific points on the line, say one, two, and four. And we are interested in the value of this random function at these three points. So we are interested in F of one, F of two, and F of four. Now the Gaussian process is a distribution over functions. So every time you draw a function from it you get a different function. So the values of these three points are random, okay? And they follow a Gaussian distribution. They follow the Gaussian whose mean is zero and whose covariance is given by this function. So the covariance between one and itself is one. The covariance between one and two is E to the minus one. The covariance between one and four is E to the minus. So over here we get E to the minus three squared. So E to the minus nine, the covariance between two and one is E to the minus one, between two in itself is one, between two and four is E to the minus four. And so we get E to the minus nine, E to the minus four and one. So although the Gaussian process gives us a distribution over all functions, if we just limit attention to those three points and we just look at the functions values at those three points we get a Gaussian distribution. And so if we were to draw from this distribution, so let's look at F of X, and this is zero. We might get values like this, this, and this. That would be an example of a draw from this distribution. Now, what does it mean to draw a function from the Gaussian process? How can we do that concretely? Well, one way to do it is to just choose a sequence of points, say X one, X two, and so on and to sample the function value at X one then sample the function value at X two given what we've done for X one and so on. So we first sample the function value at X one. Then we sample the function value at X two given what we've chosen for X one. Then we sample the function value for X three given what we've chosen for X one and X two and so on. So let's say that we are sampling F in this way and we are up to Xt. So what we want to do now is we want to sample the value of the function at location Xt. And we've already sampled its value. We've already determined the value of the function at F of X one, all the way to Xt minus one. What is the distribution? What is the conditional distribution of F of Xt given the values that we've already chosen? Well, by the definition of the Gaussian process we know that the joint distribution of F of X one through F of Xt is a Gaussian distribution. It's some T dimensional Gaussian distribution and we can pinpoint exactly what Gaussian distribution it is from the mean function and the covariance function. Now, because this is Gaussian, it means that the distribution of F of Xt given the other values is also Gaussian. We get this from the conditioning formula for the Gaussian, the conditioning formula for the multivariate Gaussian. And in fact, here's the conditioning formula right here. So given the values that we've already chosen F of X one through F of Xt minus one, the conditional distribution of F of Xt is a one dimensional Gaussian. And we have a simple formula for the mean and variance of that Gaussian. So one way to draw a function from a Gaussian process is to just choose some sequence of points and then sample the value of the function at the first point, then the value of the function at the second point, given the first point and so on. Let's see a little example of this at work. Okay, so let's return to the same Gaussian process we had before. So we have our input space X and now the average value at any location is zero. We have that by the mean function and at every location the variance is one. So when we are sampling our first point, we are sampling from the Gaussian with mean zero in variance one. So a 95% confidence band is between two standard deviations so it's minus two to plus two. So at any given point in the space this is a 95% confidence band for where the function value will lie. So let's say that our first point is X one. So we sample from the Gaussian N zero one, the standard normal and let's say we get this value over here. So we've sampled F of X one. That was our first step. Now given F of X one, how does the conditional distribution change? So now we have X again. Okay, so we have our mean zero. Let's say this was the same plus two and minus two and now we've sampled X one and we got a value slightly below the mean. We got this value here. What is the new 95% confidence band? Well, the distribution at any other point X is a Gaussian as well, and we can figure out a 95% confidence band by simply looking at two standard deviations around the mean for that particular Gaussian. So points close to X one will have a value fairly close to X one because they're highly correlated with X one whereas points further from X one will be closer to this baseline over here. So the conditional distribution, a 95% confidence band for the conditional distribution might look something like this. Close to X one. You would expect function values very close to the value you've already sampled whereas far from X one, you return to this baseline. So now let's say that the next point we choose is say X two. And let's say that the value we get is this one over here. What is the new conditional distribution over the function values at all the remaining points? Okay, so let's see what we have so far, we've just chosen two values. We've chosen them at X two and X one. This was zero, two and minus two. And the value we had at X one was slightly less than zero and the value we had at X two was slightly less than that. So the value we had at X one was somewhere here. The value we had at X two was somewhere here. Given these two values, what is a 95% confidence band for F of X at all the remaining points X? Well, now it might look something like this. (mouse clicking) Okay, so now we choose another point. Let's say we choose X three over here. And let's say that the value we get at X three is this one over here. What is the new conditional distribution? (mouse clicking) So again, let's draw our mean value of zero. We've sampled the function at X two, X one and X three. At X two, we got a value, at X one, we got something like this, at X two, we got something like this and at X three we got something say over here. Now given these three values, the conditional distribution at any other point X is a one dimensional Gaussian. We know it's mean, we know it's standard deviation and so it's easy for us to write down a 95% confidence interval for it. And when we do that, the intervals will turn out to perhaps look something like this. (mouse clicking) And so in this way, we continue and when we draw more and more points we'll find that the function that we are approaching in the limit is in fact a continuous function. So the Gaussian process is a distribution over functions. So we have an input space X, we have the function values F of X, and if we draw a function from this Gaussian process, maybe it looks like this. And if we draw a second function maybe it would look like that. And if we were to draw a third function maybe it would look like that. And if we were to draw a fourth function maybe it would look like that we have a distribution over all possible functions on this space. Okay, so that's it for our lightning overview of Gaussian processes. We've seen that these are a sophisticated generalization of the multivariate Gaussian that actually inherit a lot of the nice properties of the multivariate Gaussian. And because of these nice properties Gaussian processes are very widely used in modeling spatial statistics. So like the Gaussian, Gaussian processes are elegant, they're practical, they're simple and they're very popular in practice. 