(gentle music) - Last time, we introduced the multi-variate Gaussian. This is a distribution over D dimensional space that allows us to capture dependencies between the different features. This already makes the distribution very useful, but what we'll now see is that the Gaussian has a variety of other special properties that make it especially easy to work with in practice. The first property can be simply stated as follows. A linear transformation of a Gaussian is again a Gaussian. Okay, so to be a little bit more precise, let's say we have a random variable X that is D dimensional, and let's say that X has got a Gaussian distribution, so its distribution is some D dimensional Gaussian, N mu sigma. Mu is the mean of the Gaussian, and sigma is the covariance matrix. Now let's say we decide to take a linear transformation of X, okay? So we pick a K by D matrix A, and we look at AX, a linear transformation of X. Now, X is D dimensional, A is a K by D matrix, and so AX is a vector in RK. It turns out that AX will itself have a Gaussian distribution, in this case, a K dimensional Gaussian. What are the mean and covariance of this Gaussian? Well, we can go ahead and figure these out. So let's start with the mean of AX, so by the mean, we mean the expected value, and by linearity of expectation, we can pull the A out. So we pull out the A, and we get A times the expected value of X. Now, the expected value of X, we know it's mu, and so we get A times mu. So the expected value of AX is just A times mu. Okay, now let's move on to the covariance. What's the covariance of AX? Well, by definition, it's the expected value of AX, minus the mean of AX times AX, minus the mean of AX transposed. Now, we've already figured out the mean of AX, so let's plug that in. So we get the expected value of AX minus A mu, times AX minus A mu transposed. Now we can pull out the As to the side. So we get the expected value of let's factor out the A to the left in the first term, and let's factor out the A to the right in the second term, and again by linearity of expectation, we can pull out the As. So we get A times the expected value of X minus mu X minus mu transposed times A transposed. And we know what this is, that's just the covariance of X. So we get A times sigma times A transposed. And so what we see is that the linear transformation of X, AX has a Gaussian distribution whose mean is A mu, and whose co variance is a times sigma times A transposed. So in a nutshell, any linear transformation of a Gaussian is itself a Gaussian, and the parameters of the transformed Gaussian are very easy to figure out. There's this nice simple formula for them. Now let's return to our previous example where we talked about a set of D sensors placed on a bridge. Let the readings of those sensors be denoted X one through XD, and as we said, what we wanted to do was to model the joint distribution of these readings. So let's say that we use a Gaussian for this purpose. We have D dimensional data. Let's say we want to fit a D dimensional Gaussian to it. The Gaussian given by parameter is mu and sigma. So question number one is how do we set these parameters? How do we set mu and sigma? So the normal way of doing this, the maximum likelihood approach would be to take a collection of observations, so take multiple observations of these D sensors, and to then set mu to the empirical mean, and sigma to the empirical covariance. Okay, so let's say we take observations of these sensors. Let's call them X superscript one through X superscript M. We take M readings, that is, readings at M different points in time of all these sensors. So each of these readings is a D dimensional vector. Now what we'd do is we'd set new to the empirical mean, that is, just the average of these readings, and we'd set sigma to the empirical covariance, which is one over M times X1 minus mu, X1 minus mu transposed, all the way to XM minus mu XM minus mu transposed, simple. Okay, question number two, so now we have mu and sigma, what is the distribution of the I sensor? So we have these D sensors. So we have the joint distribution over all D sensors. That's this Gaussian given by mu and sigma. And now we are interested in a specific sensor, the I sensor, what's its distribution? Well, its distribution is Gaussian, it's a one dimensional Gaussian. Its mean is mu sub I, and its variance is just given by the II entry of the covariance matrix. It's sigma I sub I, nice and straightforward. Okay, question number three, suppose we are interested in a particular subset of the sensors, and we want to know the joint distribution of that subset? Okay, so just to be more concrete, let's say for example that we have a total of six sensors. We have the joint distribution overall six, that's our Gaussian mu sigma, but we are only interested in say three of the sensors. Let's say we are interested in the subset of sensors, sensors number one, three, and four. So what we care about is not all of all six readings, but just the subset X sub S, which consists of X one, X three, and X four. What is the distribution of X sub S? It turns out that is again Gaussian. So X sub S is Gaussian. The mean of it is mu sub S, which is simply the mean of the first sensor, the mean of the third sensor, and the mean of the fourth sensor. And the covariance of X sub S is given by sigma SS, which is the sub matrix of sigma corresponding to these three sensors, okay? So just to be a little bit more clear, in this case, we have six sensors total, so the covariance matrix is six by six. Let's just draw it out. We have a six by six covariance matrix, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So this is the entire covariance matrix, but we are saying that the only sensors we are interested in are sensors one, three, and four. So we'll pull out the sub matrix corresponding to those, which is this sub matrix over here. It is this three by three sub matrix. That's what we mean by sigma SS. Okay, now let's move on to one final question. Suppose that some of the sensors fail, and what we want to do is to infer their values from the remaining sensors. How can we do this? Well, it turns out that the conditional distribution of those missing sensors, given the other sensors, the ones that are correct, the conditional distribution of the missing sensors is in fact again Gaussian, and there's a simple formula for the mean of the Gaussian and for its covariance. So we have a nice formula for the distribution of some subset of sensors, given the readings of the other sensors. So let's see what this means pictorially. So we have two sets of sensors, X sub S and X sub T, and we have a Gaussian distribution over all of them. Let's say the Gaussian looks something like this, okay? So that's the overall joint distribution over all of these sensors together, X sub S and X sub T. Now, what is the distribution of X sub S just by itself? Well, in order to do that, we just project the Gaussian onto X sub S, and we'd get something that looks like this. So if we want the distribution just over S sub S by itself in the absence of any information about X sub T, then projecting this top distribution onto just X sub S, we would get something that looks kind of like this. Okay, but now we have a reading for these other sensors. Let's say that's our reading, and we wanna know what is the conditional distribution of X sub S given this reading? Well, the reading tells us that we lie on this slice over here, and so what we want to know now is what is the conditional distribution of X sub S along that slice? Well, pictorially, we see that the conditional distribution would probably be something more like this. That's the distribution we want. That's the conditional distribution of X sub S, given X sub T, and it turns out that that is again a Gaussian distribution with this mean and this covariance. Now, an interesting thing to note here is that the mean of the conditional distribution depends on the values of the other sensors, as we would expect, but the covariance does not, and in fact, the variance of the conditional distribution is always less than the variance of X without any additional knowledge of X sub T, okay? So X sub S by itself has this distribution. When we're given values for X sub T, we get this updated conditional distribution, and as you can see from the picture, the conditional distribution has a smaller variance than the original distribution. Okay, so we've seen many convenient properties of the multivariate Gaussian. We've seen that it's easy to fit such a Gaussian to data. We've seen that it's easy to determine the distribution of an individual feature, the distribution of a subset of features, the distribution of any linear transformation of the data, and even the conditional distribution of some features, given other features. For all these questions, the answer is that the resulting distribution is again Gaussian, and moreover, there's a simple formula for it. It's hard to imagine how things could possibly work out more easily than this. 