(light music) - Welcome back. So we've spent a lot of time talking about distributions for one-dimensional data, distributions like the normal, the Poisson, the beta, the gamma, and so on. Now we're gonna move on to multivariate data. That is data that has more than one feature, and we'll talk about distributions for this kind of data. Foremost amongst these is the multi-variate Gaussian distribution. Let's start with a simple example. So it's increasingly common for large structures like buildings and bridges to contain embedded low power sensors. For instance, you might have a bridge that contains an array of little sensors, each of which measures local strain. The purpose of these sensors is to pick up on possible structural problems long before these problems are visibly manifested. So let's say for example, that we have a bridge and let's say that there are d sensors on the bridge, and that each of these sensors produces a real-valued reading at any given point in time. So at any time, the collection of these sensors produces d readings, which we can think of as a d-dimensional vector. This is multi-variate data. Now, in order to effectively use these sensors, there are some basic statistical estimation problems that we need to solve. The first thing we need to do is to model the distribution over normal readings. The reason we want to do this is so that we know when we have readings that are anomalous or abnormal. The second thing we want to do has to do with sensor failures. Now these sensors will occasionally fail, and as a result, periodic maintenance is needed maybe once every few years where defective sensors are identified and replaced. In the meantime, however, we would like to infer the values of the defective sensors based on the other sensors. So for both of these tasks for modeling the distribution of these d sensors, and for this inferential task where we are inferring the values of some sensors from others, what we need to do is not just to model the individual distributions of the sensors, but also to model the correlations between them and the multi-variate Gaussian distribution allows us to do just that. Okay, so the multi-variate Gaussian distribution in d-dimensional space is a distribution over all of Rd. And what I mean by that is that it assigns a positive density to every point in Rd. Now, this distribution has two parameters. It has a mean that we will denote by the Greek letter mu and it has a covariance that we'll denote by capital Sigma. Mu is a d-dimensional vector and Sigma is a d by d matrix. What exactly are these? Well let X denote a random draw from this Gaussian distribution. So X is a d-dimensional point which means that it has features X1 through Xd. Then mu is just the expected value of X. So that means that the first coordinate of mu is the average value of X1, the expected value of X1 and the second coordinate of mu is the expected value of X2, and the d coordinate of mu is the expected value of Xd. So mu is the expected value of X. Sigma, on the other hand, is a matrix that contains all pairwise covariances between the d features. So the ij entry of this matrix is the covariance between Xi and Xj. What about the diagonal entries of this matrix? Well, the ii entry of the matrix is the covariance between Xi and itself which is the same thing as the variance of Xi. Okay, so we have a Gaussian over d-dimensional space that is parameterized by a d-dimensional vector mu and a d by d matrix Sigma. And the shorthand we'll use for this Gaussian is N mu Sigma. Now the way the distribution looks is unimodal. That is to say it's a distribution with a single hump. The point of highest density is mu. And as you move away from mu, the density drops off in ellipsoidal contours, rather like this picture. The precise formula for the density is over here. And this can be a little bit forbidding at first, I suppose, but let's try to parse at least a little bit of it. So this initial term over here is just a normalizing factor. It's just something that you've gotta stick in the front to make sure that the density integrates to one. It contains some familiar constants like by 3.14 and then it's got this thing. What is this? Well, sigma is the covariance matrix. It's a d by d matrix. What do we mean when we put vertical bars around the sigma? What we mean is the determinant of the matrix. So that term over there is the determinant of sigma. Now, the important part of the density is this part over here. And the reason I call that the important part is it's the only part that depends on x. X is the point at which we are trying to evaluate the density and we see that this part over here is actually a quadratic function of X, and in fact, an ellipsoid is a quadratic shape. Okay, so to better understand this density, let's start by looking at a special case. The special case we're gonna look at is when the features Xi are all independent. And moreover, the features all have the same variance. Let's call it little sigma squared. In this case, what is the covariance matrix Sigma? Well, let's see. The ij entry of this matrix is the covariance between Xi and Xj. What is that? Well, we said that the Xis are all independent. So the covariance between Xi and Xj is zero. They're independent and therefore uncorrelated. So the covariance is zero when i is not equal to j. When i equals j, well then we just have the variance of Xi, which we've said is sigma squared. So what we see is that this matrix, capital Sigma is a diagonal matrix and the entries along the diagonal are all little sigma squared. In other words, capital Sigma is a little sigma squared times the identity matrix, the d by d identity matrix. Okay, so we have the covariance matrix. What is its inverse? Well, a diagonal matrix is very easy to invert. You just flip all the entries along the diagonal and so its inverse is just one over sigma squared times the identity matrix. Okay, great. So now let's look at the Gaussian density, and let's try to simplify this formula in the special case that we've been looking at. So in our special case we have that Sigma equals little sigma squared times the identity. Let's see, what is the determinant of this matrix? Well, the determinant of a diagonal matrix is easy to figure out, it's just the product of all the diagonal entries. So in this case, the diagonal entries are all little sigma squared so their product is sigma to the 2d. Okay, what else do we have? Well, we have this term over here. What is that equal to? So we have X minus mu transpose Sigma inverse X minus mu. Well Sigma inverse is one over sigma squared times the identity. So we have X minus mu transpose times one over sigma square times the identity matrix times X minus mu. And this just simplifies to X minus mu squared, the squared euclidean distance between X and mu divided by sigma squared. So when we plug in all of these simplifications we see that in this special case, the Gaussian density has the following formula. It's one over two pi to the d over two. Now let's do the determinant term. We get sigma to the d. And now let's do the important part, the part that actually depends on X, it's the exponential of negative X minus mu squared over two sigma squared. This is what the Gaussian density looks like in our special case. So let's summarize what we have so far. We've been looking at the special case where the features Xi are all independent and moreover have the same variance. In this case, we've seen that the density can be simplified and it looks like this. So let's take a look at this density. In fact, let's focus on the important part over here. What we see is that the density at any point X depends only on the Euclidean distance between X and mu. The further X is from mu, the smaller the density. And so we immediately see that the point with the highest density is mu itself. And as you move away from mu, the density drops off in these spherical shells. And for this reason, we call this the spherical Gaussian. Okay, so we've looked at a special case of the Gaussian. Now let's look at another special case but one that is slightly more general. Let's look at the case where the Xis, the features are again independent but this time they're allowed to have different variances. So we'll say that the variance of Xi is sigma sub i squared. Now, because the Xis are independent, they're uncorrelated. And so once again, the covariance matrix is a diagonal matrix. Its off diagonal terms are zero but this time the diagonal entries are potentially different. Nonetheless, because it's a diagonal matrix, it's easy for us to invert the matrix. We just flip all the diagonal entries, and it's easy for us to figure out the determinant of this matrix, we just multiply together the diagonal entries and when we do those simplifications, the density looks like this. Okay, so this time the density is once more highest at mu. But now as you move away from mu, the density drops off in ellipsoidal contours. And in fact, the ellipsoids are axis-aligned. That is to say the principal axes of these ellipsoids are just the coordinate axes. The stretch along the first coordinate direction is sigma one, the standard deviation of X1. The stretch along the second coordinate direction is sigma two, the standard deviation of X2, and so on. We call this the diagonal Gaussian. So the diagonal Gaussian is the special case where the covariance matrix is diagonal, and in this case the characteristic ellipsoids of the Gaussian are axis-aligned. Now that we've seen these two special cases, let's move on to the fully general multivariate Gaussian in its full glory. Now, this is the density of the Gaussian. It has parameters mu, the mean, and a general covariance matrix Sigma. This time the density is once again highest at mu at the mean. And as you move away from mu, the density drops off in ellipsoidal contours but the ellipsoids are not necessarily axis-aligned. Okay, so let the principal axes of the ellipsoids be denoted U1, U2, and so on. What are these directions and what is the stretch along this direction and along this direction, and so on? How do we figure these out? Well, in order to do this, all we need to do is an eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix. So the covariance matrix, if you recall, is a d by d matrix, it's square, it's symmetric, it's positive semi-definite. We can do a spectral decomposition of this matrix and that gives us the eigen vectors of the matrix. Now these are vectors in d-dimensional space that are unit vectors. They have length one and they're also orthonormal, they're at right angles to each other. And for each of them we have a corresponding eigen value. And these eigen values are greater than or equal to zero. It turns out that the principal axes of the ellipsoid for this Gaussian are exactly the eigen vectors. And the stretch along this direction is just the square root of Lambda one. The square root of the first eigen value, and the stretch along this direction is the square root of Lambda two. The stretch along the second direction is the square root of the second eigen value and so on. So the eigen decomposition of the covariance matrix tells us the exact shape of these ellipsoids. So that's interesting because now if we just tilt our head a little bit, we see that we get an axis-aligned ellipsoid. Okay, so when we tilt our head, what we are doing is shifting our frame of reference from our normal coordinate system, E1, E2, E3, to an alternative basis, U1, U2, U3, and so on. And when we tilt our head, we seem to get a diagonal Gaussian. What is this diagonal covariance matrix? Well, it's the covariance matrix where the stretch along the first direction is the square root of Lambda one. And so the variance in that direction is Lambda one, for the second direction is Lambda two, all the way to Lambda d. And so the general Gaussian is just a rotated version of a diagonal Gaussian. What this also means is that if you look at the projection of x onto the first principal axis and its projection onto the second principal axis, and so on, these projections are all independent. So the d-dimensional Gaussian has d independent directions. And to find these directions, we just find the principal axes of the ellipsoids. In other words, the eigen vectors of the covariance matrix. So now let's look at one other aspect of this Gaussian. How do we actually figure out the formula for these contours of the density? Well pick any value c greater than zero. And now look at all points. Look at all points in d-dimensional space whose this value equals c. Okay, so look at all points for which x minus mu transpose Sigma inverse x minus mu equals c. Now these points all have the same density because of this formula, they represent a contour of equal density. So what do these points look like? Well, this is actually a generalization of Euclidean distance called squared Mahalanobis distance. So the contour lines of equal density, the sets that have the same density are points whose Mahalanobis distance from mu is the same. So what we see is that when we move from the spherical Gaussian to the general Gaussian what we're also doing is moving from squared Euclidean distance to squared Mahalanobis distance to this generalized kind of Euclidean distance. Okay, so we've now introduced the multivariate Gaussian which is the most important by far of all multivariate distributions. 