(upbeat music) - Okay, welcome back. Let's take stock of where we are in this course. Now, the first part of the course was about the most basic primitives of unsupervised learning. Methods like, K means clustering and principle component analysis that are used all the time and are simple and efficient. The second part of the course was about probabilistic modeling. That is fitting distributions to data. This included simple methods, simple distributions, like the Gaussian and the Poisson, and went all the way to much more sophisticated models, like Markov random fields and energy-based models. Now we're gonna switch gears once again. In this third and final part of the course, we will be talking about representation learning. That is, finding good representations of data, good embeddings of data. So one thing we've seen, is that data often has interesting latent structure. For instance, the data might form well-defined clusters or data might lie close to a low dimensional linear subspace. This structure is latent, in the sense that we aren't told about it beforehand. We need algorithms that can discover the structure, for example, clustering algorithms. Now, once we've uncovered this latent structure, we can use it in several ways. For instance, we can use it to better understand the data. If our data consists of a million points, that's hard to fathom in its entirety. But then if it turns out, that this data forms 20 well-defined clusters, and for each cluster we have a center, a representative, that is much easier to understand. A second thing we can do with the latent structure is to use it as a representation for subsequent learning. For instance, if the data lie close to a low dimensional subspace, we can discover this subspace using principle component analysis, project the data onto this subspace, and used this projected form of the data as an alternative representation for subsequent learning. So what we'll be talking about a lot is finding good representations of data. What exactly do we mean by this? So the data lie in some space of their own. The data come in some original space. But very often this original data space is tricky to work with. Okay, so for example, let's look at this data over here. So the data is three dimensional, but the points lie on a two dimensional manifold, a two dimensional surface, which looks like a Swiss Roll. It's often called the Swiss Roll data. Now this geometry is a little bit weird to work with. It's tricky, okay? For instance, let's say that we want to cluster the data. The default way of doing this would be to use something like K means clustering, which uses Euclidean distance. But Euclidean distance does not work correctly in this space. For instance, let's look at these two points over here. The Euclidean distance between them is actually very small, whereas we should rightly consider these points very far apart. It would be much better to work with an alternative representation, to work with an embedding of the data in two dimensions like this, where we have essentially unrolled the manifold. Euclidean distance will work just fine in this space over here. So what happened over here? The original data space had weird geometry. This is hardly pathological. In fact, it's the norm for high dimensional data. So we found an alternative representation, an alternative embedding, in which familiar geometry works well. So we'll be talking about finding good representations and what we mean, is representations in which familiar geometry, like Euclidean distance or dot products and simple methods like linear classifiers work well. In fact, finding good representations is often critical to the success of machine learning. 