(upbeat jingle) - Welcome back. When looking for representations or embeddings of data, we often hope to capture some kind of structure in the data. We are gonna start with embeddings that capture distance structure. So let's say that we have n data points, say x1 through xn. And there is some distance function that is suitable for our application. We can specify the distances between these points in the form of an n by n matrix, where the ij entry of the matrix is the distance between xi and xj. This is the distance function that we want that will work well for our application. The problem is that these distances might not be Euclidean. And for instance, we would therefore not be able to apply K-means clustering directly to them. So what we would like to do is to realize these distances in Euclidean space. In other words, we would like to embed the points in Euclidean space. We would like to find n vectors, z1 through zn, such that the Euclidean distance between the ith and jth Vector is exactly this target distance Dij. Or if we can't get exactly the right distance, we'd like to at least approximately get the right distance. So one basic question here is, does such an embedding necessarily exist? If we start with an arbitrary distance function, is it always the case that it will be realizable in Euclidean space? Will we always be able to find an embedding that exactly captures these distances? Well, let's look at a couple of examples. So here we have a distance matrix on three points. And what the matrix is telling us is that, let's see, we've got three points, x1, x2, and x3. The distance between x1 and x2 should be three. The distance between x1 and x3 should be five. And the distance between x2 and x3 should be four. Is it possible to embed these points in Euclidean space in a way that exactly captures these distances? Well, let's try. So we are gonna try embedding these points into two dimensional Euclidean space. So we have two axes. Let's label them zero, one, two, three, four. One, two, three and four. Let's put z1 right at the origin. Okay, so z1 is the 0, 0. Let's put z2 over here. So z2 is the point 3, 0. And let's put z3 up here. So z3 is the point 3, 4. Okay, now let's look at the inter point distances. This distance over here between z1 and z2 is exactly three. This distance over here between z2 and z3 is exactly four. And this distance over here between z1 and z3 is exactly five. So this embedding exactly realizes the target distances. We can embed this distance function into Euclidean space perfectly. Now, let's look at another example. Here we have a distance matrix on four points. Okay, and let's see what it's telling us. So it's saying that the distance between x1 and x2 is one. The distance between x2 and x3 is also a one. The distance between x3 and x4 is also a one. The distance between x1 and x4 is also a one. And the distance between x1 and x3 is two. So it's like we are computing distances along this cycle. Can we realize this in Euclidean space? Well, let's try a two dimensional embedding again. So once more, we draw our axes. We put a zero here, one here, one here. And let's put our point z1 right there. Let's put z2 over there. z3 over here. So z3 is 1, 1, z2 is 1, 0, z1 is 0, 0, and let's put z4 over here, so z4 is 0, 1. And now let's compute some distances. Well, the distance between z1 and z2 is exactly one as it should be. The distance between z2 and z3 is exactly one as it should be. The distance between z3 and z4 is exactly one as it should be. And the distance between z1 and z4 is also one as it should be. Okay, we're almost there. What about the distance between z1 and z3? Uh oh, that distance is the square root of two, whereas we actually want it to be two. So this embedding is not exactly right. Some of the distances are corrupted by a multiplicative factor of square root two. It turns out that there is no embedding into Euclidean space that perfectly realizes these distances. In fact, it's not possible to do any better than this embedding over here. So we've seen that some distance functions can be perfectly realized in Euclidean space, and some can't. How can we tell? We'll return to this question next time. 