(calm music) - The machine learning community has spent a lot of time thinking about manifolds and how to learn them. Let's take a quick look at this fascinating field. Now we say data is high-dimensional if it has lots of coordinates, lots of features, but actually, it is often the case that this apparently very high-dimensional data actually lies close to a much lower dimensional surface, a lower dimensional manifold. Let's look at a couple examples of how this might arise. So the first example is motion capture. Here, the goal is to create accurate models of human motion. One way to do it is to get a human subject, like let's say this person over here, and to put lots of markers on that person's body, and to record the positions of these markers as the person moves around. Now, if there are M markers, each marker has a three-dimensional position. And so at any given point in time, we get 3M numbers. This data is 3M dimensional. If M is large, like a thousand, it's high-dimensional data, 3000-dimensional. However, these 3000 numbers are not independent of each other. In fact, they are functions of just a few joint angles in the body, maybe 20 or 30 angles. They're not linear functions of these angles, there are sines and cosines involved. So these 3000 coordinates, each of them is a non-linear function of the say 20 or 30 angles, which are the true degrees of freedom in the system. So this 3000-dimensional data lies close to a 20 or 30-dimensional manifold. Let's look at another example, which is speech data. Now a speech signal is a one-dimensional time series, it looks something like this. It's a continuous time series, and a common way to represent it on a computer is to take a window of speech, say of 25 milliseconds, and then to apply multiple filters to the signal within that window. Now, if we apply a hundred filters, then this window is represented by a 100-dimensional vector. The more filters we apply, the higher dimensional the representation becomes. And in this way, we can get an arbitrarily high-dimensional representation of the speech. But at the end of the day, the speech was produced by somebody's vocal tract. And the vocal tract is a physical system with just a few parameters, with just a few degrees of freedom. And so the signal is actually on or close to a much lower dimensional manifold. In fact, manifold data abounds, it's widely believed that a lot of the data that seems high-dimensional actually lies close to a much lower-dimensional manifold. And the whole enterprise of discovering these manifolds and benefiting from them is called manifold learning. Now, if data lies on a manifold, how can we recover this manifold? How can we find what it is? And how can we find an embedding that exposes the structure of the manifold? So for example, looking at this Swiss roll data over here, although the data is three-dimensional, it lies close to a two-dimensional surface. And what we would like therefore is to take this data, and to embed it in a two-dimensional space to effectively unroll the manifold. How can we do that? One of the most well-known methods for doing this is called the ISOMAP algorithm. The starting point for the algorithm is just a collection of data points, okay? So for example, these points over here, and the goal is to find an embedding of these points in a lower dimensional space that captures the manifold structure. ISOMAP does this in two steps, the first step is to estimate geodesic distances between data points. Geodesic distance is distance along the manifold. So for example, the geodesic distance between this point over here and this point is the length of this path along the manifold. So the first step is to estimate these distances. And then once we have the geodesic distances between all pairs of data points, we simply embed the points in Euclidean space in a way that realizes these distances. How do we do that? With multidimensional scaling. So in fact, we already know how to do the second step. All we need to do now is to figure out how to find geodesic distances between data points. Okay, so one thing worth pointing out is that in general, Euclidean distance and geodesic distance are very different. So look at these two points, for example, the Euclidean distance between them is distance as the crow flies, it is simply the length of the line connecting them. Geodesic distance on the other hand is distance along the manifold. It is the length of the shortest path on the manifold that connects the points. In this case, it is the length of this path over here. How can we compute these distances? So the key intuition is that although geodesic distance and Euclidean distance are in general very different, for points that are very close together, like these two, geodesic distance is basically the same as Euclidean distance. So what we do is we construct a neighborhood graph. If we have n data points, we construct a graph with n nodes, one for each data point, and we put an edge between two nodes if those data points are close together. So these are the edges in the graph, and we set the length of an edge to be the Euclidean distance between those two points, which is the same as geodesic distance or roughly the same since the points are so close together. So we've created this graph on the points, we have edges between close-by points, and the lengths of those edges are just Euclidean distance which coincides roughly with geodesic distance. Now, to find the geodesic distance between far away points we simply find the shortest path in this graph. And so for these two points, for example, it would approximate the geodesic distance by a sum of these small line segments, something like this. This would be the shortest path between these two points in the graph. And in this way, we get a good approximation to geodesic distance. Once we have the matrix of all geodesic distances between the endpoints, we can go ahead and find a low-dimensional embedding that realizes these distances, such that the Euclidean distance between the embedded points is the correct geodesic distance between those points. Okay, so that is the ISOMAP algorithm, quite simple. Now, let's look at some examples of how it works. So in this example, what the authors did was to take a particular statue, a bust, and take photographs of it from many different angles. So each data point is an image, and as such it is high-dimensional because there are many pixels in the image, but the actual degrees of freedom are very small, just two or three degrees of freedom, corresponding to the angle from which the bust was photographed. ISOMAP was able to discover these degrees of freedom very well. So this is the two-dimensional embedding that it found. And what we can see, for example, is that this axis really corresponds to whether the face is tilted to the left or the right. Over here we have the face looking to the left. Over here we have the face looking to the right. And likewise, this axis corresponds to whether the face is looking down or looking up. So ISOMAP has been good at discovering the underlying degrees of freedom, the underlying two or three degrees of freedom in this rather high-dimensional data. Here's another example where ISOMAP was applied to images of the digit two from the MNIST dataset. Now, because this is MNIST, each of these images is 28 by 28, and therefore the dimension of the data is 784. But here, ISOMAP was used to produce an embedding into just two dimensions, and we can see that it captures some of the important degrees of freedom in the data. It turns out that this axis captures the behavior of the bottom loop, whereas this axis captures the behavior of the top arch. It's fairly impressive. So there are lots of other methods for manifold learning, here are a few of them, and there are lots of other things that are studied in this field as well. For instance, notions of intrinsic dimension. So what we've seen is that often data appears to be very high-dimensional in the sense of just having lots of features, lots of coordinates, but actually it lies close to a lower dimensional surface. Or in some other sense, it just has much fewer degrees of freedom. How can we define a notion of intrinsic dimension that captures these degrees of freedom? In a sense, this is the real dimensionality of the data. Another topic is developing algorithms for basic tasks like clustering or density estimation that don't specifically look for manifold structure, but nonetheless are able to benefit from such structure if it happens to be present in the data. And finally, there are methods that look for more advanced types of topological structure in the data. For example, holes in the manifold. So this is a large and rich field, and if you are interested in these kinds of geometric algorithms, I highly encourage you to look further into the literature. 