(bright digital music) - Multidimensional scaling is an area of statistics and machine learning that is devoted to finding embeddings of data, typically, embeddings that preserve distances. Let's see how these work. So let's recap our basic problem. We have some distance function between endpoints that is specified in the form of an nxn matrix D, where the ij entry of this matrix is the target distance between the i point and the j point. We want to realize this distance function using a Euclidean embedding. That is to say we want to find vectors z1 through zn such that the Euclidean distance between zi and zj is exactly the desired distance Dij. If we can't do that, then we want an embedding in which we at least approximately capture these distances. How do we do this? So it turns out that there are several methods for this. And the most widely used of them is called classical multidimensional scaling. So in classical multidimensional scaling, the first thing we do is to work with squared interpoint distances. That's easy. We can just look at this matrix and square all the numbers in it. So from now on, we'll assume that matrix D contains the squared distances, the desired squared distances. So we have this matrix. Question number one, can these distances or rather squared distances be realized perfectly in Euclidean space? Does there exist a set of vectors z1 through zn that perfectly realizes these distances? It turns out that there's a very simple answer to this question. The distances can be perfectly realized if and only if this thing over here is positive semidefinite. So let's take a look at this. So we take our matrix D, and we compute minus 1/2 times H times D times H. Where H is this thing over here. So what is that? H is an nxn matrix whose diagonal entries are one minus one over n. And it's off diagonal entries are negative one over n. So we compute minus 1/2 times H times D times H. Let's call the result B. It is some nxn matrix. Distances D can be realized in Euclidean space if and only if this matrix B is positive semidefinite. How do we check if a matrix is positive semidefinite? It's just one line of Python. So this is a very simple check for whether our distance function can be perfectly realized in Euclidean space. Now what if it turns out that it's not realizable? What do we do then? Well, it turns out that this same matrix can also be used to give us an approximate embedding. In fact, we can just read the embedding off from the matrix. Let's see how this all works out. So let's start by talking about the relationship between distances and Dot products. So take any endpoints in Euclidean space, call them z1 through zn, and let's look at the distances between these points and also the dot products between these points. So we'll define D to be the matrix of square distances. So the ij entry of D is the square distance between zi and zj. And we define B to be the matrix of dot products. So the ij entry of B is the dot product between z1 and zj. This matrix is called the Gram matrix, and it's used a lot in machine learning. What is the relationship between these two matrixs? If I give you the dot products, can you figure out the distances? If I give you the distances, can you figure out the dot products? It turns out that the answer to both questions is yes. Given one of these matrices, you can get the other one. Okay, so first off, it's not hard to express square distances in terms of dot products. Let's take any two points x and x prime, and let's look at the square distance between them. If we expand this out, we get the square length of x plus the squared length of X prime minus two the dot product of x and x prime. Now the squared length of x is just the dot product of x with itself, and the squared length of X prime is just the dot product of x prime in itself. So in other words, we can express the square distance between x and x prime just in terms of dot products. If we know the dot products, we also know the distances. In matrix form, what this means is that the ij entry of the distance matrix which is the square distance between zi and zj, is the II entry of the B matrix z dot product with itself plus the jj entry zj product with itself minus twice zi dot zj. So given the B matrix, we can figure out the D matrix. We can also go in the other direction. It turns out that that Gram matrix B can be obtained from the distance matrix using this formula. Where H as before is a square matrix whose diagonal entries are one minus one over n, and whose off diagonal entries are negative one over n. So knowing the distances gives us the dot products and knowing the dot products gives us the distances. Let's look at a little example of this. So let's say we have two points x1 and x2. Where are these points? Well, x1 is this point over here, x2 is this point over here. So this is at negative one. This is at one, x1 is one zero, x2 is at minus one zero. So first of all, what are the squared interpoint distances? What is the matrix of squared interpoint distances? Well, we just have two points. So we are talking about a two by two matrix. Okay? So let's see. The distance from x1 to itself is of course zero. The square distance from x1 to x2, well the distance is two, so the square distance is four. Likewise, we have a four here and a zero. Okay, so this is the matrix D. The matrix of squared interpoint distances. Now what is this H matrix? Well, let's see, we said that it's an nxn matrix. So in this case a two by two matrix whose diagonal entries are one minus one over n. So in this case 1/2 and 1/2, and whose off diagonal entries are negative one over n. So in this case, minus 1/2 and minus 1/2. Okay, now let's try out this formula. So we said that the Gram matrix should be given by minus 1/2 times H, times D, times H. Let's go ahead and compute this thing. So we have minus 1/2. Let's copy down this matrix again. And now let's multiply the laws two matrices. We get zero plus minus two, zero and two, two and minus two, okay. And so this is minus 1/2. And now let's multiply the two matrices. We get minus one minus one. We get one plus one. We get one plus one, and we get minus one, minus one. And so let's see, this works out to one, negative one, negative one, one. Is this the correct matrix of dot products? Is this the correct Gram matrix? Well, let's see. The dot product of x1 with itself is indeed one. The dot product of x1 and x2 is indeed minus one. And the dot product of x2 with itself is indeed one. So this is the correct dot product matrix. So starting with just the distance matrix, we were able to get the dot product matrix using this simple formula. Now let's see how we use this to find an embedding. Okay, so we started with a matrix of squared interpoint distances. And using just this matrix, we wanted to find an Euclidean embedding. That is to say we wanted to find vectors z1 through zn that exactly realized these distances. So that the square distance between zi and zj equals Dij. Let's start with the simple case where the distances are realizable. In other words, it is possible to find vectors that have exactly the correct target distances. So we know these vectors exist, how do we find them? Okay, so the first step is to compute the Gram matrix. We've already seen how to do that. The gram matrix is simply minus 1/2 times HDH. Great, so now we have the matrix of dot products. Now this matrix is positive semidefinite. Why? Well, we won't go into the argument in detail, but roughly it's by virtue of the fact that it is a matrix of dot products. What this means is that the eigenvalues of this matrix are nonnegative. So B is a matrix that's nxn. It's square symmetric and positive semidefinite. We can go ahead and compute its spectral decomposition. Do you remember this from PCA? The spectral decomposition expresses B as the product of three matrices, three Nnxn matrices. First we have U, which contains the eigenvectors of B. The columns of U are the eigenvectors of B. Then we have a diagonal matrix Lambda which contains the eigenvalues of B. And we've seen that those eigenvalues are positive. And finally we have U transpose. Now because the eigenvalues are positive or nonnegative, we can take this square root. And so we can take this decomposition and write it as U times the square root of Lambda. That is the same diagonal matrix, but we just take the square roots of all the diagonal entries, times the square root of Lambda, times U transpose. And this is the same as U times the square root of Lambda times U times the square root of Lambda transpose. So we can write B. We can write the Gram matrix in the form YY transpose where Y is just U times the square root of Lambda. So in other words, by taking the spectral decomposition of B, so we already have B, we got it from this formula. By taking its spectral decomposition, we can express it in the form YY transpose. And that gives us our embedding. Because our embedding is just gonna be the rows of Y. The first row of Y is gonna be the embedding of the first data point. The second role will be the embedding of the second data point, and the N row will be the embedding of the N data point. Why does this work? Well, let's see. Let's look at the I throw of matrix Y and the J throw. The dot product between these two rows is the ij entry of YY transpose, okay. Because YY transpose the ij entry a bit is the I throw of Y times the J column of Y transpose which is the J throw of Y. Now, we've said that YY transpose is B, and so Yi dot Yj is exactly the ij entry of B. It's exactly the dot product that we wanted. So we found an embedding yi through yn that has the correct dot products, and if it has the correct dot products then it must also have the correct distances. So this is how we can find a Euclidean embedding in the case where there exists a perfect embedding, where there exists a collection of vectors that exactly capture the target distances. Now what happens when our distance matrix cannot be exactly realized in Euclidean space? Well, it turns out that almost exactly the same method works. We just need to make a slight tweak to it. So now we have our matrix of square distances. Once again, we compute the Gram matrix. Once again, we do the spectral decomposition. But this time the Gram matrix is not positive semidefinite which means that some of the eigenvalues are negative. Oh, if they're negative, we can't do the square root. So here's what we do. We simply zero out the negative eigenvalues. We take our diagonal matrix, and if there's any negative number on it, we replace it by zero, then we continue exactly as before. That's it. A very simple scheme for finding Euclidean embeddings and this is called classical multidimensional scaling. Let's see an example of this method at work. And this example is from Kruskal and Wish. Joseph Kruskal and Myron Wish, two of the pioneers of the field of multidimensional scaling. So what they did was to take a collection of 10 US cities and obtain the distances between them. Okay, so for example this is the distance between Atlanta and Chicago. Now starting from this distance matrix, they used classical multidimensional scaling to obtain a two-dimensional embedding of the cities and this is what they got. Now the embedding is rotated a little bit, but if you tilt your head you will see that it is just about exactly right. So just from the distances between cities, we can recover the relative locations of these cities. That's what multidimensional scaling does. Now, multidimensional scaling is a large field with lots of different methods. The most popular of these is classical multidimensional scaling which we've seen. But there are other ways to find embeddings as well. And so let's briefly look at one of them. So once again, we have some target distances, and we wanna find an embedding say y1 through yn, that realizes these distances. Now, the way we are gonna do it is to define a cost function or a loss function associated with any embedding y1 through yn. And this cause function captures how far off we are from the desired distances. So it's the sum over all points ij, of how far the distance yi minus yj squared is, from the desired distance, Dij squared. If this loss function is zero, it means we've exactly captured the distance is D. And so what we do is to find an embedding that minimizes this loss function. How can we do that? Well, for example, by gradient descent. So this is a nice straightforward method. But it turns out that this loss function is not convex, and as a result, there aren't really any strong guarantees associated with the embedding that we get at the end. Okay? So we've seen how to solve the problem of realizing an arbitrary distance function using a Euclidean embedding. This is the basic primitive of representation learning. And next time we'll see how this is used for the problem of manifold learning. 