(upbeat music) - We've talked about distance preserving embeddings, that is embeddings into Euclidean space that capture some pre-specified target distance values. Now, that works well when we actually have target distance values. But sometimes the only information we have is much more qualitative. Let's see when this arises. So, suppose we have a collection of N items, say books or movies, and we want to embed these items. We want an embedding of these items as vectors that respects a distance or similarity function. And the distance or similarity we want to capture are a particular human's perception of how similar these movies are. Now, if we had concrete numbers for the distances between movies, we could use classical multidimensional scaling. But in situations like this, where human perception is involved, it's unlikely that we would have concrete numbers. Typically, all we have is much more qualitative information. For instance, we might have a collection of movies. We might have a collection of pairs of movies that the human considers similar. And a collection of pairs of movies that the human considers dissimilar. Or we might have triplets of movies, x, x prime, and x double prime, where the human subject thinks that x is closer to movie x prime than to movie x double prime. Based on just this kind of information, this non-numeric qualitative information, is it possible to obtain an embedding? Indeed it is. So, let's see how. So, let's say that what we have is a collection of triplets. A triplet i, j, k means that item xi, for example movie xi, is closer to item xj than it is to xk. Based on this collection of triplets, we want an embedding of the N items that respects these constraints. How can we find it? Well, let's go ahead and express these constraints in terms of the embedding. So, for any triplet i, j, k, what we want is that yi is closer to yj than to yk. So, we want that the distance from yi to yk is greater than the distance from yi to yj. And we want this for all these triples. In fact, we can even ask for a little bit of a gap between the two distances by writing it like this. And now it would also be good to regularize the embedding and we can do that by asking to minimize the sum of the lengths of the y's. Okay, so this will give us an embedding. And it turns out that this particular optimization program is one that can be solved efficiently. So, what are the pros and cons of this? Well, the good is that this is efficiently solvable. It turns out that in fact, it is a convex program. What about the bad? Well, when we have human similarity assessments, they are likely to be noisy. So, it's quite possible that these triplets, for example, are not fully consistent with each other. It might not therefore be a good idea to enforce every single triplet as a hard constraint. So, the constraints might be noisy. How can we handle this? How can we soften up the constraints? Well, we can do it by adding a little bit of slack just like we do in support vector machines. Okay, so let's see what we had. Our optimization program was to minimize the sum of the squared norms of the y's subject to these constraints. We were saying that the distance from yi to yk should be greater than the distance from yi to yj by at least a little bit of a margin for all triples i, j, k in our collection. Now, the problem arises over here because we don't necessarily want to enforce every single triplet as a hard constraint. But what we can do is to add a little bit of slack. So, we create these slack variables which have to be positive. And by adding slack, we allow some of these triplet constraints to be violated. Now, we don't want to use too much slack so we add a term to the minimization. And that's it. This is a nice method for obtaining and embedding based only on qualitative similarity assessments. Okay, so we've seen a way to embed items based only on qualitative similarity or distance assessments. And our particular method is based on formulating a convex program. In fact, it's analogous to a support vector machine. And in fact, you can imagine other methods that are analogous to say logistic regression. There are many ways of solving this problem. There's also a voluminous literature in psychology on human perceptual judgments that's very relevant to this whole enterprise. Next time, we'll see an alternative way of solving this problem that's based on neural nets. 