(gentle music) - Welcome back. In this course so far, we have looked at many different types of unsupervised learning. Now, we are gonna turn to a formalism that unifies many of them. It's called the autoencoder. So over the course of the class, we have talked about many different types of structure that can exist in data, for example, clusters, or linear subspaces, or manifolds, or distance and similarity structure. In each case, we've developed special algorithms that can uncover this kind of structure, that can capture this sort of structure. But sometimes this isn't enough. For instance, there are cases in which data might possess multiple types of structure. For instance, maybe there are clusters and each cluster is itself a manifold, or sometimes the data has structure that is not on this list, in fact, structure for which we don't even have a definition. Hmm. So this sounds a little bit mysterious. What kind of structure are we talking about? What is this unnamed structure? Well, actually, there are lots of types of structure for which we don't have precise definition yet. Consider images, for instance. Images have a lot of structure. If you think of an image of a house in the countryside, a house is a very structured object. It has doors and windows in a particular configuration. Each door is a structured object. It has panels, it has a handle that can be of various types. A window is a structured object it has a frame, it has glass. There are certain types of shapes that it commonly possesses. Images have a lot of structure, and the structure is not something that's on this list. In fact, we don't have a precise definition of the kind of structure that exists in images. So how can we possibly capture structure if we don't even have a name for it, if we don't have a definition for it? An autoencoder is a machine for capturing generic types of structure. This is what it looks like. So X over here is a data item, for instance, an image or a document. It lies in the data space, script X. So we have data items that lie in the data space, script X. Now, an autoencoder is given by two functions, f and g. F is an embedding function, or an encoding function. It takes data items and embeds them in an alternative latent space Z. So Z is the latent space or embedding space. And f takes a data item and embeds it, produces an alternative representation of it in this other space, script Z. Now, there's also a decoding map that takes one of these latent representations and maps back to the original data space. So g takes latent representations, takes these embeddings and maps back to the original data space. Now, what we'd ideally like is that if you take a data item and then you encode it and then you decode, you get back the original data item. But in general, this will hold only approximately. And so what we typically do is to find an encoding map and a decoding map that minimizes this reconstruction loss, that minimizes the difference between original data items X and the reconstructed version g of f of X. Here, l is some loss function that measures the disparity between X and its reconstruction. For example, it could just be square Euclidean distance. So what's the purpose of all of this? Why do we want to embed X? Why do we wanna find an encoding and a decoding of it? Well, the hope is that this embedded form, Z, the latent form, is in some way simpler than the original X. It should be the case that the structure in the data really stands out in Z. Z should expose the structure in the data and be simpler in this sense, okay? For instance, if we want to build a classifier, then it will frequently be better to build the classifier on top of the latent representation Z than on top of the original data X. So this is the formalism of the autoencoder and it turns out that many of the methods that we have studied actually conform to this paradigm. For instance, PCA, Principle Component Analysis, is an autoencoder. Hmm. Why is that? Well, PCA is something we use to project data to reduce dimension. Let's say that we have data that lies in d dimensional space and we wanna reduce the dimension to k. We can do this using principle component analysis, and the way we do it is to first compute the covariance matrix of the data and then find the top k eigenvectors of the covariance, okay? So we will find the top k eigenvectors, let's call them u1 through uk. So top k eigenvectors of the covariance matrix. And so this matrix over here is of size d by k. Now, in order to project points down to k dimensions, what PCA does is to take a data item x and map it to u transpose x. So this is a map from the original data space Rd to a latent space Rk. F encodes the data, it sends it from d dimensional space into k dimensional space. And the reverse map g, the decoding map, is the reconstruction map. Given a latent representation Z, the reconstruction is simply u times Z. So PCA looks like an autoencoder. In fact, it's an autoencoder in which the encoding map f and the decoding map g are both just linear maps. So is PCA minimizing some loss function? Indeed, it is. It turns out that PCA is minimizing the reconstruction loss where we measure the loss by squared Euclidean distance. It's minimizing this reconstruction loss, in fact, the expectation of this over X, and it minimizes it over all functions of this type, over all linear encoding and decoding maps. To be more precise, it minimizes it over functions that look like this, where P is a projection map. So in fact, PCA is an autoencoder and it is an optimal autoencoder of this type. K-means is also an auto encoder. Okay, so let's say that we have data in d dimensional space and we apply k-means clustering to it. So k-means gives us centers, say mu one through mu k, and these centers are just vectors in Rd. Okay, so our original data space is Rd. One way in which we can encode a data point is to just encode it by the identity of the cluster that it belongs to. We can just encode it by the index of its cluster. If we do that, the latent representation, the encoding is just the cluster label. So it's something in the range one to k. And so when we have a data point x, we encode it by its cluster label, which is the cluster center, the label of the cluster center to which x is closest. So F is an encoding map that sends a data point to a label from one to k, the index of the cluster that x belongs to. What about the decoding map? If we have a cluster label one through k, how do we send it back to the original space? What point in the original space would we map it to? Well, we would just map it to the cluster center. So g of z is just mu sub z. So viewed in this way, k-means clustering is actually also an autoencoder. And in fact, it turns out that it is an optimal autoencoder where the loss function that it's minimizing is again the squared Euclidean distance between x and its reconstructed version, where f and g are constrained to be of this form. So we've seen that both PCA and k-means clustering fit neatly into the autoencoder formalism. Now, in the case of k-means and PCA, the functions f and g are very simple. But once we have this formalism, we no longer have to force f and g to be simple. In fact, we can allow them to be arbitrary. They could be arbitrary neural nets. When we do this, when we allow f and g to be more sophisticated, what we do wanna insist on nonetheless is that the embedding is useful to us in some way. And what this means is we typically want the embedding to be simpler than x, to be something in which the structure of x stands out. Sometimes it's lower dimensional than x. Sometimes what we want is an embedding that is more sparse than x, for example, an embedding in which most of the coordinates are zero. Next time, we'll look at autoencoders of this type, autoencoders that produce sparse embeddings of data. 