(thoughtful music) - Welcome back. So so far, we have introduced the autoencoder paradigm, and we looked at the case of autoencoders that can generate sparse embeddings of data. Now we'll turn to a very powerful and popular class of autoencoders, in which both the encoding and decoding function are neural nets. This is called the variational autoencoder. So here is our picture of autoencoder. We have a data space, script X, and an embedding space, a latent space, script Z. The auto encoder is given by two functions, an encoding function that maps from the data space to the embedding space, to the latent space, and a decoding function that maps from the latent space back to the original data space. Now previously, we talked about deterministic autoencoders. So in the deterministic case, f and g are deterministic functions. What that means is that if this is the data space, and this is the latent space, f takes a data item x and maps it to a specific latent vector z. That's a deterministic map. We will now look at probabilistic autoencoders, where f takes a data item, and instead of sending it to a specific latent representation, sends it to a distribution over latent representations. What this is saying is that anything in here is really a somewhat reasonable latent representation for x. Likewise, with the decoding map, so previously, we looked at deterministic decoding maps. A deterministic map g takes latent representation z and sends it to a very specific data item. Now we'll allow this map to be probabilistic. In other words, it takes a latent representation and sends it to an entire distribution over the data space, effectively saying that any of these data items could correspond to the latent representation z. So there are many different types of probabilistic autoencoders, but a particularly popular variety is the variational autoencoder. Let's start by looking at an example. The variational autoencoder was introduced by these two authors in this paper. They introduced the model of the variational autoencoder, or VAE. They specified a way of learning these models, and then they also ran a bunch of experiments, they did a bunch of examples. And one of these examples involved the MNIST data. Now, MNIST, as we all know by now, is a data set of handwritten digits where each data item is a 28 by 28 grayscale image of a handwritten digit. So if we were to make this into a vector, each of these images becomes a vector that is 784-dimensional. Now, the value of each pixel is grayscale. It's between zero to 255, but we can binarize it, okay? So we can convert each pixel to just zero or one, on or off. And if we do that, the space of possible images, the data space is 0, 1 to the 784. That is to say the space of images that are 28 by 28, and where each pixel is either on or off. That's the space in which binarized MNIST images lie. So that's our data space. Now what about our embedding space? Let's take it to just be two-dimensional Euclidean space, okay, so quite simple. Now, it turns out that this picture shows the two dimensional embedding of images. So you can see that as you walk around in this two-dimensional space, you smoothly transition from ones, to eights, to threes, to fives, to zeros, twos, fours, and so on. It's very impressive. Okay, so let's draw a little bit of a picture of the architecture over here. So we have our data space, which is 0, 1 to the 784. It looks something like this. It's a Boolean hypercube. So this is our data space X. What I've drawn here is 0, 1 cubed, okay? The three-dimensional Boolean hyper cube. What we have in the case of MNIST is the 784-dimensional Boolean hypercube. Every one of these corners is the vector in 0, 1 to the 784. Every corner is therefore a binarized image. So that's the data space. The latent space is simply two-dimensional space, so it looks like this, and we have a map that goes from the latent space, from any latent vector z to the data space, okay? As we move around in the latent space, these are the images that we get in the data space. So geometrically, that's what's going on in producing the picture on the right. But wait, we said that in the case of probabilistic autoencoders, this function g doesn't map to a single image, but somehow to a distribution over images. What kind of distribution is that? How does that work? Okay, so let's look more closely at that. So once again, we have our two spaces, the data space, which is 0, 1 to the 784, the space of binarized images. This is one image, this is another image, this is another image. Every corner of this 784-dimensional Boolean hypercube is an image. We also have our latent space, script Z, which is k-dimensional Euclidean space. And in fact, we were looking at the specific case when k equals two, two-dimensional euclidean space. Now, the decoding map takes a specific latent vector z and maps it not to a specific image, but to an entire distribution over images. How does it do this? Well, it turns out that what it does is that g of z is actually a 784-dimensional vector whose entries are in the range zero to one. In other words, g of z is a vector of probabilities, p1, p2, all the way to p784. This is the probability that the first pixel is on. This is the probability that the second pixel is on. This is the probability that pixel number 784 is on. And so g of z specifies a distribution over images, a distribution where pixel one has this probability of being on, pixel two has this probability of being on, pixel 784 has this probability of being on, and all the pixels are independent. We call this a product-Bernoulli distribution. Geometrically, what this means is that g takes z and maps it to a point in here. It doesn't map it to the corner of the hypercube. It doesn't map it to a corner, which would be a specific image, but it maps it to a point inside the hypercube, a point like this. And this point is a vector of length 784 with numbers between zero and one. And those numbers give us a distribution over all possible images, over all corners of the hypercube. This distribution gives some probability to any image. It says all the images in the hypercube are possible, but by far, the most likely image is this one, the closest image. So in this way, g of z specifies a distribution over the Boolean hypercube, and this kind of distribution is a product-Bernoulli distribution. It's product because the pixels are treated as independent, and Bernoulli because each pixel is just a coin flip. It has some probability of being on, and some probability of being off. Okay, so this is our map g. What about the other map, the map in the other direction, the encoding map? So that map takes a specific image, and now, instead of returning a specific latent representation, it returns an entire distribution over z, and it's gonna be a distribution that looks like this, a diagonal Gaussian distribution. So what this says is that for this specific image x, anything in here is really a possible latent representation, a possible embedding, but the most likely embedding is the one right in the middle, and as you move away from it, it gets less and less likely, okay, there are less and less good embeddings of x. So how do we specify this? Well, this distribution is a diagonal Gaussian. So f of x consists of the center of the Gaussian as well as the variance in each of the two directions, the standard deviation in each of the two directions. So f of x is a four-dimensional vector, giving the means and standard deviations of this Gaussian over here. So this is the way in which the encoding and decoding maps don't map to specific latent representations, or to specific data points, but rather to entire distributions. The way we do it is that these functions map to the parameters of a simple distribution over the latent space or over the data space. Okay, so how are these functions realized? In the case of VAEs, they're realized by neural networks. So let's start with the decoding function, g of z. So here, we take a latent representation, which in our case is k-dimensional. So this is a latent representation z, and now, we send it through a neural net that we call g, and the output is a vector of length 784, where the entries lie in the range 0, 1. Okay, in the opposite direction, we map from the data space to the latent space, okay? The encoding map. So here, we start with an image which is 784-dimensional. We pass it through a neural net, which we call f, the encoding map, and it returns a latent representation. And this is a representation of size 2k, where the first k items are the means of the Gaussian, and the second k items are the variances. So it gives us a Gaussian distribution over k-dimensional space by specifying the means of the Gaussians and the variances. For a diagonal Gaussian in k-dimensional space, we need 2k parameters. So the overall architecture is quite straightforward. How do we learn one of these models from data? It turns out that that is not quite so simple, and there are a lot of steps and intuitions involved. What we are gonna do is to start with just a high-level overview of the learning process, and later, we'll come back and get into more of the details. So let's see. We are given a bunch of data points, a bunch of observations, and based on these observations, for example, MNIST images, we want to learn one of these variational autoencoders, okay? In other words, we want to learn the functions f and g, the decoding function g and the encoding function f. This is a summary of the spaces. We have the data space up here, where the x's lie, and I'm drawing the latent space down here, where the z's lie. Now, what we've seen is that f of x takes one of these images, and rather than giving us a specific latent representation, gives an entire distribution on z, to be precise, a diagonal Gaussian distribution, okay? Therefore, f of x is the parameters of this Gaussian. We can think of Q sub f of x as the Gaussian with parameters f of x. Likewise, the map g of z, the decoding map, takes a latent representation, and rather than giving us a specific image, gives an entire distribution on images. It is the product-Bernoulli distribution whose parameters are given by the vector g of z. Okay, now what we are gonna do is to make this model fully Bayesian, and in order to do that, we will put a distribution on the latent space. Let's call this distribution pi. This is a prior distribution on the latent space, which for us was this simple two-dimensional or k-dimensional Euclidean space. This prior distribution would typically just be a Gaussian distribution, okay? So it turns out then that we can write down an expression for the joint distribution of any pair x and z, let's see what it is. The probability of any pair x, z is the probability of z times the probability of x given z. Well, the probability of z is just the prior applied to z, and the probability of x given z, well, we have some z over here, we use g, we apply g to get a distribution over the x base, so it is the distribution over the x base that we get from z applied to x. This is the joint distribution of x and z, and we now have a simple expression for it. The interesting thing here is that there is no f involved. We don't need an f for this. What we want with f is that we want it to agree with this joint distribution. Once we have a joint distribution, that tells us the full distribution of the pair x, z. We can also get the conditional distribution, the distribution of z given x. And we want this map, we want the encoding map f to agree with that. We want it to be the case that this encoding map, which takes x and gives us a distribution over z, that this is actually the correct conditional distribution. Okay, so what we are gonna do now, given our data, is to find maps f and g that maximize this function. Okay, so this function has two parts. The first thing we want to do is to maximize the likelihood of the data. And the second thing we want to do is to minimize the KL divergence, the distance between the correct distribution of z given x. So minimize the divergence between the encoding map f of x and the correct distribution of z given x. In other words, we want this encoding map f to produce an accurate distribution over the latent space. So this is the optimization problem that we end up solving in order to learn the encoding and decoding functions f and g. Next time, we'll delve into this in a little bit more detail, but for now, let's look at a few more examples. So what's going on over here is that the dimension of the latent space which we've been calling k is gradually increasing. Here we have the two-dimensional latent space, which is the example we saw before, and now it's increased to five, 10, 20, and so on. What's happening as we increase this dimension? Well, it looks like the images are getting sharper. Okay, so next time, we'll look at variational autoencoders from a slightly different angle, and we will also delve into a lot more detail. 