(gentle music) - Last time we introduced the notion of an auto encoder. This is a very general formalism. We saw how, for example, it includes principle component analysis, and K-means clustering as special cases. Now let's turn to a new kind of auto encoder, one that produces sparse representations of data. So, here's the setup. We have data that lies in D-dimensional space. So our original data space, script X, is RD. But what we want is a sparse representation of the data. That is, we want to represent each data point, by a vector in which most of the entries are zero. Okay, in particular, we say, that a representation is K-sparse, if it has at most K entries, that are non-zero. So if at most K entries of Z are non-zero. We'd like to produce, this kind of representation of the data. Now, what's the relationship between X and Z? Well, we are gonna ask that X is a linear function, of Z. That is, X is given by, or approximately given by, Z times some matrix phi. What is the dimension of this matrix? Well, Z is M-dimensional and X is D-dimensional. So this matrix has to be D by M. Okay, so let's look at a picture of what we have. We have our original data points, which are D-dimensional. For each data point, we are gonna produce, a sparse representation that we call Z. And this sparse representation is gonna have dimension M. And the relationship between these is that, X is approximately equal to this phi matrix, times the sparse representation. Now let's look at the columns of this phi matrix. Let's call the columns phi one through phi M. There are M columns. We are gonna call the matrix, the dictionary, and the columns of this matrix, we are gonna call dictionary elements. Why do we have a special name for them? Well, let's look at a little example. Let's say that for our vector X, for some particular vector X, our sparse representation looks like this. So it's a representation that's mostly zero. We start with a zero. The next coordinate maybe is a 1.2. Then we have a whole bunch of zeros. And then finally at the end, we have another non-zero coordinate, which is a minus 2.3. Okay, that's our sparse representation. What this says is that X, is approximately equal, to 1.2 times the second dictionary element, minus 2.3, times the last dictionary element. So this original vector X might have been very dense, okay? So maybe all of its coordinates are non-zero. Every coordinate contains a whole bunch of information, and therefore, X is a little bit hard to understand. But when represented in terms of dictionary elements, X has a much simpler form. It is just 1.2, times one of the dictionary elements, minus 2.3, times another one of the dictionary elements. When represented in terms of dictionary elements, it has this nice sparse form. Another way to say this is that X is a sparse combination, of dictionary elements. What we wanna do is to find a bunch of dictionary elements, such that our data can all be represented sparsely, in terms of these dictionary elements. Now, it's often the case that in fact, M, the sparse dimension is larger, than the original dimension D. So it's often the case, that M is greater than D. So for example, maybe our original dimension is a hundred. So we have data that's a hundred dimensional, but very dense. And then we look for a sparse representation, that's 500 dimensional, but 10 sparse. So even though the sparse representation, is much higher dimensional, it has a lot more entries. Almost all of the entries are zero, at most 10 of them are non-zero. So this sparse representation would therefore, be easier to understand than the original representation, even though it's seemingly higher dimensional. So this is the benefit of a sparse embedding. How do we find it? How do we find sparse representations, of this type? So let's try to formalize the problem. We have a bunch of data points in our original space. Let's call the data points X superscript one, through X superscript M. They lie in our original data space, which is D-dimensional space, and we also have, some target dimension for the sparse representation. Okay, so let's say our original data, is a hundred dimensional, and we want a sparse representation, and we don't mind if the sparse representation, has dimension 200, or maybe 500. In order to produce this representation, we need to find a dictionary, and we need to find the sparse representations, of the individual points. So we need to find the dictionary or equivalently, we need to find M dictionary vectors, M dictionary elements, which are organized into this dictionary matrix over here. And then we need to find the sparse representation, of the first data point X one, the sparse representation of the Nth data point, XN. Okay, so for each data point, XI, we are gonna approximate it, by the dictionary times its sparse representation. So we need to find both the dictionary phi, and the sparse representations, Z one through ZN. If we write this in matrix form, this is what we get. So on the left we have the data matrix, where we've taken our end data points, and then just stacked them up as columns of this matrix. So it's a matrix of size D by N. Then we have our dictionary matrix, which is of size, D by M, and then we have our sparse representations, the sparse representation of the first point, the sparse representation of the second point, and so on. Each representation is M dimensional. There are N of them. So the size of this matrix is M by N. So what are we given and what do we need to figure out? Well, all we are given is this matrix X. That's all we know. We have to figure out the dictionary phi, and we need to figure out the sparse representations, Z. So we are just given X, and we need to determine, phi times Z. Okay, now, this looks a whole lot, like a matrix factorization problem. Given X, we want to factor it into this form, where the constraint is that Z has sparse columns. How do we find these phi and Z? Well, as usual, we are gonna write this as an optimization problem. Let's see how this works out. Okay, so we have our data. We have end data points, which we are gonna assemble into a big matrix, okay? That we're gonna call X. So we have our first data point, all the way to the end data point. We wanna find dictionary vectors, phi one through phi M, or equivalently, we wanna find the dictionary matrix phi one through phi M. And then we also wanna find sparse representations, for each of the data points, or equivalently, we want to find the matrix of sparse representations, Z one for the first point, ZN for the Nth data point. In order to produce these, we are gonna minimize this loss function, okay? So the loss associated with a particular dictionary, and a particular set of sparse representations, is given by two considerations. Firstly, we want it to be the case that X of I, the Ith data point, is very well approximated, by phi times the sparse representation of that point. So we want this distance, the square euclidean distance between the Ith data point, and its sparse reconstruction to be as small as possible. The other thing we want, is that we want these vectors Zs of I, these embeddings to be sparse. So here, sparsity is just some way of measuring, how sparse that vector is. For example, it could just be a count, of the number of non-zero entries. So number of non-zero entries of ZI. Great, so given X, we wanna find phi, and Z that minimizes this loss function. Unfortunately, as is very common in unsupervised learning, this is an NP hard optimization problem. There is no efficient algorithm, that always finds the minimizing solution, phi and Z. But a common heuristic for solving this problem, is something called alternating minimization. Let's take a quick look at how this works. So the way we solve this problem, is we start by initializing the dictionary phi somehow. For instance, we could just make the columns of phi random vectors in D-dimensional space. Okay, so we have some initial guess for phi. Once we do that, we repeat two steps, until convergence, we fix the current phi, and now we find sparse representations, that minimize this function, and then we fix the sparse representations, and we find the phi that minimizes this function. Another way to think about it is that, well, we want X to be approximately phi times Z. And so what we are gonna repeatedly do is to fix phi, and then optimize Z and then fix Z and optimize phi. And we'll keep alternating, between those two until the process converges. And this is a commonly used method, of finding a good sparse encoding of data. Let's look at a little example of how this pans out. This is from Olshausen and Field, and it's a paper in neuroscience, and it is one of the seminal papers of sparse coding. So it turns out that neuroscientists, are extremely interested in sparse coding. One reason for this is that the brain, has a huge number of neurons, about a hundred billion of them, but at any given time, only a tiny fraction of these neurons are actually firing. That means that the brain maintains a sparse representation, of whatever stimulus it is encountering. This happens in the visual cortex, for example, whatever image the brain is seeing, it has some sort of sparse representation of it. In order to investigate this, what these authors did was to begin with a collection, of natural images, that just means everyday images. So they had this collection of images, and from each image they extracted patches, of a fixed size, eight by eight patches. These were black and white patches. And so each patch was a 64 dimensional vector. On the left, over here, they took these patches, this very large collection of patches, and applied PCA to them. Here you can see the eigenvectors that PCA found, where each eigenvector, which is a 64 dimensional vector, is shown as an eight by eight patch. And you can see that the eigenvectors, really look like grids of different resolutions. On the right, they applied sparse coating, and here are some of the dictionary elements, that they found. And it turned out that these dictionary elements, really very closely resemble filters, corresponding to cells in the visual cortex. And so sparse coding has been applied, to many different types of stimuli, and it has felt that it really is, a fundamental organizing principle of the brain. Okay, so we've talked a little bit about sparse coding, but how does it fit into the auto encoder paradigm? Well, let's see. So we have our original data space, which is D-dimensional, and now we are looking for an alternative representation, of the data, where we want vectors in RM, in M-dimensional space that are sparse. That's the latent space, the embedding space. Given a particular data item X, the way we embed it is, well, we wanna find a Z, such that phi times Z is very close to X, and we also want Z to be sparse, and given a sparse representation, the reconstruction is simply phi, times that sparse representation. So the encoding map, F, is a little bit complicated. It involves solving an optimization problem, but the decoding map, G, is very simple. It's linear. And so in this way, we can see, that sparse coding really fits very neatly, into the auto encoder paradigm. Now, the method we've talked about, is just one way of producing sparse codes. We can also do this using neural nets. Okay, so we can also come up, with a neural net based sparse auto encoder. How would this look? Well, let's see. We had our original data space, which was RD, and we wanna produce representations that are M-dimensional, but we want them to be sparse. Let's say we want them to be K-sparse. What we'll do now is to allow the encoding, and decoding function to be quite general neural nets. Okay, so let's start with the encoding. So we start with a vector X, okay? And this is gonna be something that's D-dimensional, and then we pass it through some neural net, and it produces something that is M-dimensional. Okay, how do we make sure that this output is sparse? There's actually a very simple way to do it. Whatever the output is, we just keep the top K values, we zero out everything else. And so this whole process, over here is the encoding function, F. What about decoding? Well, in the case of decoding, we start with this sparse representation, Z, which has dimension M. We pass it through a neural net, and we get a D-dimensional vector, and that's the decoding function. Now, we will choose these neural nets, F and G, to minimize reconstruction error. So overall, the paradigm is actually quite straightforward. It's a relatively straightforward implementation, of the auto encoder paradigm. So we've seen two ways of producing sparse codes. The first uses dictionaries and linear decoding. The second uses general neural nets. Which one is preferable? Well, the first approach using the dictionary elements, is one that has been studied intensively. Many books have been written about it. It is fairly well understood. It's been widely used and has worked quite well. The second approach, the neural net approach, is much more recent. It is much less understood, but at the same time, it has a lot of potential, because the FNG functions are really very expressive. They can be arbitrary neural nets. And because of this, in future, it might be that this method turns out, to be the one that gets used more. 