(upbeat music) - Last time, we did a high-level overview of the variational autoencoder. Now, let's get into some of the nitty-gritty. So what we're gonna do now is to look at the variational autoencoder from the viewpoint of latent variable models. So we have some data space, script X, and there's a distribution over this space that we want to model. So we're in our standard distribution learning scenario. The way we are gonna model this distribution is via a latent variable model. So we'll have a latent space, script Z, and this latent space is typically just some low dimensional Euclidean space. So typically this latent space is something like Rk, and we are gonna create a fully Bayesian model. So we'll also have a distribution over this space. And typically, this is something very simple like a Gaussian distribution. Let's call that distribution, pi. So it's just a Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and identity covariance matrix over this K-dimensional latent space. Okay, so we have a K-dimensional latent space and we have a simple Gaussian distribution on it. Then we have our data space on which there's some fairly complicated distribution. What we are gonna do is to learn a function g, that maps from this latent space to the data space. This function might be quite complex, and so we are gonna use a neural net to represent this function. It will typically be a highly non-linear function. And the important thing now is that this function doesn't just take a latent representation and map it to a specific data point, but rather it takes a latent vector, Z, and maps it to an entire distribution on the data space. The way we do this is we start by selecting some family of distributions on the data space, typically, a simple family. (pen clicking) And, g of z is just one of these distributions, okay? So, if this family of distributions is parameterized by a vector, theta, g of z is just one of these vectors. So for each point in the latent space, g maps it to one of these distributions, some distribution in this family of distributions. And this gives us the joint distribution of x and z. So the joint distribution of a pair, x and z, is just the probability of z, the probability of z in that latent vector, and that's simple, it's just the Gaussian probability times the probability of x given z, okay? So the probability of x given z is this thing over here. It's the probability of x under the distribution parameterized by g of z. Okay, so this is the overall latent variable framework for variational autoencoders. Last time we looked at the specific example of binarized MNIST let's briefly return to that example. So in the case of binarized MNIST, the space in which the data lie, the space of binarized images is the 784 dimensional Boolean hypercube. Each of the corners of the hypercube is a specific image. So these are all images over here. The latent space is just Rk, and in fact, we were looking at the specific case where we just had two-dimensional Euclidean space as the latent space. Now, we're gonna have a distribution over this space. So we have a distribution pi over this space, (pen clicking) and this is gonna be a really simple distribution, just a Gaussian distribution, okay? So that gives us a distribution over vectors in this space. And for each vector Z, we have a decoding map that takes z and maps it to a distribution over x. The way this works is that g of z will actually be a vector of probabilities. It'll be a point in 0, 1 to the 784. So in other words, g of z is a vector of length 784 where every entry is between 0 and 1, and can therefore be thought of as a probability. So we have P1, P2, P3, all the way to 784. And we think of this as the probability that pixel number 1 is on. And this is the probability that pixel number 2 is on. And this is the probability that pixel number 3 is on. And this is the probability that pixel number 784 is on, and they're all independent. So in this way, g of z is a point inside this hypercube. And that point gives us a product distribution over all possible images. It's a distribution under which the most likely image is this, but every image has positive probability. Okay, so we now have two things. We have pi, which is a distribution over z, (pen clicking) and we have g that gives us a distribution over x given z. So it's the distribution of x given z. When we combine these two things, we get a full joint distribution over x and z. So, the probability of any combination x, z is just the probability of z times the probability under parameters g of z of that specific x. So we have the full joint distribution of x and z. This is interesting. We don't need the reverse map, the encoding map, f, in order to get a fully specified joint distribution over x and z. So why do we even have it? Why do we need a map going in the other direction? What is the purpose of having an encoding map? Well, there are two purposes. The first is that the map, f, gives us an embedding of images. It gives us an alternative representation of images, and this is useful for many purposes. The second is that it turns out that having the reverse map is gonna be crucial to learning g, it is gonna be very hard to learn this complex function, g, without having the reverse map as well. So let's see how this all works out. So here is our latent variable model. We have the latent space, script Z, the data space, script X. We have a simple distribution, pi, on the latent space, just a Gaussian distribution. And we have this mapping, this neural net g, that goes from the latent space to some distribution over X, okay? So we have some family of distributions on the data space and g of z just selects one of these distributions. So for each latent variable, for each latent vector, we select a different distribution on the observation space, but all the distributions lie in this family. And these two pieces, pi, which is a distribution over z, and g that tells us the distribution of x given z, together, they give us the joint distribution over x and z. Now, the one thing we need to learn over here is g, everything else is fixed. And so typically what we would do is to choose the g, to choose the neural net g that has maximum likelihood on whatever data we have, okay? But in order to compute likelihood, okay, we need to know the probabilities of any given data point x. Well, let's see, since we have the joint distribution over x and z, to get the distribution over x, we just need to integrate out z, okay, so we just need to integrate out. The joint distribution is very simple. We have it, it has a simple functional form, it's 1 Gaussian times some other simple distribution. So we have the joint distribution. In order to get the distribution over x, we integrate out z, and unfortunately, this integral is intractable. Oh, this is bad news. If we cannot get the likelihoods, how are we gonna find the maximum likelihood model? Okay, so that's a big problem. There's another problem. What we would like to do is to take a data point, x, and find in a suitable embedding, z. In order to do that, we want the distribution over z given x. Now, what is that equal to? It's the joint distribution of x and z divided by the probability of x. We have this, that's got this very simple form over here, but we don't have this. So that's another piece of bad news. We also don't have a way to easily get the probability, the conditional distribution of z given x. So in order to overcome this, we are gonna learn a second neural net that gives us this. So we are gonna learn a second neural net that we'll call f to approximate this, (pen clicking) and that is our encoding map, okay? So this is why we need f. Okay, so now we are trying to approximate the distribution of z given x. And what we'll do is we'll choose, once again, a family of distributions on z, and we'll have this map that takes x and chooses one of these distributions, so it chooses a distribution over z. Now these distributions will be very simple. For example, they might be Gaussians. And so what we wanna do is that we want f of x to give us a distribution that is very close to the correct conditional distribution of z given x. So we will let f of x select the Gaussian that is closest to this. We let f of x be the parameters of the Gaussian that is closest to this thing. So we have introduced f, we didn't strictly need f in the model, g alone gave us a full joint distribution over the latent variable and the observed variable, x. But we have introduced f explicitly in order to make everything more tractable. Okay, so now we have two neural nets, g gives us the distribution of x given z, and f gives us the distribution of z given x, and f is an approximation to this, okay? So we should think of g alone as fully specifying a model and as f being a subsequent approximation to the distribution of z given x. Okay, so now let's get back to the learning problem. We wanna choose a model, g, that maximizes the likelihood of the data. Now, we can think of the probability of x as being the probability of x and z divided by the probability of z given x, okay? That is just the definition of conditional probability. Now, we have this thing at the top, the joint distribution, we have that. The conditional distribution of z given x, we don't actually explicitly have that, that is the thing we are trying to approximate using f. So what we can do is to say, well this is approximately equal to the distribution given by f, and that's what we are gonna do. Now, in this formula, what we want is the probability of x. In this formula, we've also introduced z, and in fact we can choose any z we like. No matter what z we plug in over here, the formula is correct. But if we are using this approximation, it is best not to choose Zs that are unlikely. And so what we are gonna do is we are gonna plug in f for the conditional distribution of z given x, so we get this. But then, rather than using an arbitrary choice of z, we are gonna choose Zs that are likely under this approximate distribution, f of x. And so this is going to be our surrogate for the likelihood of x. It is called the ELBO, the Evidence-Based Lower Bound. (pen clicking) And the reason it's called that is that it is a lower bound on the log likelihood. It turns out that this expression, this ELBO which is tractable, we know this, and we know this, this is a lower bound on the true likelihood. (pen clicking) Okay, so what we are gonna do given our observations x1 through xn, is to then find functions, f and g, that minimize this evidence-based lower bound, and that's how we learn variational autoencoders. So let's briefly look a little bit more at this evidence-based lower bound, this thing over here. It turns out that it is exactly equal to the log likelihood minus the KL divergence between the correct conditional distribution of z given x, and the approximation using f. So you can look at the proof here. The entire proof is given here. You can look over it at your leisure, I'm not gonna go through the details, but it's quite simple algebra. But let's think about this expression right here. It has two consequences. So the first thing it's telling us is that, well, we know KL divergence is always positive, so the second term over here is something that's greater than or equal to zero, okay? What that means is that the true likelihood, the true log likelihood is at least the ELBO, that's why we call it the Evidence-Based Lower Bound. So the thing we are maximizing is a lower bound on the true log likelihood. The second thing that this expression tells us is that by maximizing this, we are maximizing the log likelihood, which is desirable, but we are also minimizing this thing. We are minimizing the discrepancy between the correct conditional distribution of z given x and the distribution given by f, okay? So by maximizing the ELBO, (pen clicking) what we are doing is we are maximizing (pen clicking) the log likelihood, (pen clicking) and we are minimizing the KL divergence, that is the discrepancy (pen clicking) between the true conditional distribution of z given x, (pen clicking) of z given x, and its approximation, (pen clicking) f of x. (pen clicking) So indeed, this is a sensible thing to maximize. Okay, so that's it for our lightning overview of the variational autoencoder. These are sophisticated models that are good at modeling distributions in a wide range of domains. I highly encourage playing around with these to see how they work. 