(gentle music) - We've talked about embeddings of words. Now let's talk about embeddings of sentences and paragraphs. The key point here is that a sentence is not just the sum of the words in it. What is crucial is the interaction between the words in the sentence, the interplay between them. It is important to capture this to get a good embedding of the sentence. Now, the transformer architecture of deep learning was designed precisely to capture this kind of interaction. And so it's not surprising that currently the best available embeddings of sentences and paragraphs are based on transformers. What is perhaps surprising is just how powerful and effective and versatile these embeddings have turned out to be. So let's go ahead and look at BERT. This stands for bidirectional. That's the B. Encoder. That's the E. Representations. That's the R. From transformers. That's the T. BERT was designed by these people. Now, BERT is a transformer that takes this input, a sequence of words, okay? For example, a sentence. So the input consists of a sequence of words W1 through WN, where N can be up to 512. So it can be a very long sentence or a paragraph easily. So the words are fed in at the bottom. This is a special start symbol. And then we have the words in token form, W1, W2, W3, and so on. The output of the transformer is a sequence of embeddings, a sequence of vectors of dimension 1024. So T1 is an embedding of the first word, W1. T2 is an embedding of the second word and so on. But what is crucial is that T2, for example, doesn't just look at W2 in isolation, but rather it looks at W2 in the context of the entire sentence. It captures the meaning of W2 while integrating in the context from the rest of the sentence. So these are holistic embeddings of the words in the sentence. Now, there's also an embedding, C, of the entire sentence. It's also a vector of dimension 1,024 and it can be used for sentence level classification. For example, let's say we want to classify the sentiment in the sentence. Is it positive sentiment or negative sentiment? We can build a classifier based just on this vector C. Now, the overall size of the transformer model is quite large. It has 340 million parameters. When this model came out, it revolutionized natural language processing. Researchers found that using these embeddings produced state of the art performance on essentially all key language tasks. And yet, there was no linguistic knowledge baked into this model. So how was BERT produced? How was BERT learned? BERT was learned from two unsupervised corpora, a very large data set consisting of English Wikipedia and a BooksCorpus from Google. So at the time, English Wikipedia had 2.5 billion words and this BooksCorpus had approximately another 800 million words. So a lot of unlabeled data. Now, based on this unlabeled data, BERT was trained using self-supervised learning and it was trained to perform well on two artificial prediction tasks. The first task was to figure out the missing word in a sentence. So for each sentence in the corpus, one or maybe a couple of words were removed and BERT was asked to guess the missing word. Okay, so here's an example. "The waiter poured me a something of wine." What's the missing word? Maybe cup, maybe goblet? Okay, so that was the first self-supervised task. The second task was next sentence prediction. Given a pair of sentences, BERT had to figure out if these two sentences were consecutive in the corpus. Did sentence B immediately follow sentence A or did sentence B come from somewhere else? So BERT was trained to do well on these two tasks and it turned out that that was enough to give it an really quite tremendous understanding of language. Even linguists were shocked. And in the years that have ensued, the same methodology has been used to produce increasingly powerful language models, including the current GPT-4, for example. It really seems that at this point unsupervised learning has finally come into its own, has taken its place at the very center of artificial intelligence. 