(bright music) (air whooshes) - Since about 2010, there has been a revolution in natural language processing and this revolution began with word embeddings. So let's see what these things are. A word embedding is a representation of words by vectors. So for each word in our vocabulary, we have a vector in some d-dimensional space, say, 300 dimensions. And the idea is that words that are very similar in meaning have vectors that are close together, okay? So let's say, for example, that there is a word like happy, okay? So it's got some vector. Now, words that are similar in meaning will have vectors that are very close by. So the vector for merry will be very close to this. The vector for jolly will be very close. Different words, words that are different in meaning, will be far away. So, for example, the word cake will also have a vector and this will be out here somewhere. But words similar in meaning to cake will have vectors that are close to that. So for example, maybe the word for donut has a vector like this. So these are vectors that capture the meanings of words. Quite remarkable. How do we get these kinds of representations? So we'll get to that very shortly. But before we do that, how do we use word embeddings? Well, one thing we can do is that when solving classification or prediction problems, we can use these vectors in place of the actual words. This is what enables us to use neural nets for language processing. But it turns out that there are also various other things that we can do with these word embeddings. Let's take a look at an example. So these word embeddings turn out to also be useful for certain types of reasoning. Let's say, for instance, that we want to solve a simple analogy problem. King is to queen as man is to what? Well, the answer is clearly woman, but how do we get the computer to figure this out? Well, if we have word embeddings, then we can phrase this as a linear algebra problem. The relationship of king to queen is the same as the relationship of man to what? In vector terms, the difference between king and queen, the difference between the vector for king and the vector for queen, should be the same as the difference between the vector for man and the vector for the mystery word. So we have a linear equation. Let's rearrange terms to get the unknown on the left-hand side. When we do that, we see that the vector for the unknown word is the vector for man minus the vector for king plus the vector for queen. Well, we know these three vectors, so let's go ahead and add and subtract them. And when we do that, we get some 300 dimensional vector. So what's the mystery word? Well, we have vectors for all the words in our vocabulary. So let's find the nearest neighbor of this 300 dimensional vector that we found. And it turns out that the nearest neighbor is, in fact, woman. Okay? So word embeddings can solve a problem like this. Now, this particular example was done with the word2vec embedding. There are many other embeddings out there, for example, GloVe. You can go ahead and download these and play around with them if you like. In fact, I highly recommend it. But what we see over here is that these embeddings do a lot more than simply capturing synonymous words. They also seem to be capturing a lot of other interesting relationships. Let's look at another example. So word2vec has vectors for all common English words and these include vectors for countries and cities. So in this picture, a few countries were selected, China, Russia, Japan, and so on, along with their capital cities. Now, every one of these words has got a 300 dimensional vector associated with it and what we see over here is a projection of those vectors into two-dimensional space using principle component analysis, an embedding of those vectors into two dimensions for the purpose of visualization. And what you can see is that the difference between each country and its capital is almost constant. This embedding clearly captures the country-capital relationship. That's quite remarkable, especially given how these embeddings are learned. So let's go ahead and turn to that now. How do we get word embeddings? So the basic principle is summarized by this quotation from a British linguist, John Rupert Firth. So what he said is that "you shall know a word by the company it keeps," okay? So what that means is that you can figure out the meaning of a word just from the contexts in which it appears, okay? So for example, consider this sentence. I had a slice of something with my tea. What's the missing word? Well, there are several things it could be. It could be cake. It could be bread. It could be pie. But these are all very similar things. The point is that you can figure out almost everything about a word simply from the contexts in which it appears. So let's say that there's a particular word we're interested in. Let's look at the context in which it appears, okay? Let's say in a book, okay? So every time we see the word, we look at the context. That is, a few words before it and a few words after it. If a word appears in a particular context, if there are two words that appear in the same context, we will consider them to be similar words and this is gonna give us an embedding of words. So we will embed each word based on the contexts in which it typically occurs. And when we say context, what we mean is a few words before and a few words after. So this is the overall insight, but how do we operationalize it? Well, what we do is to define an artificial prediction problem where we try to predict a word from its context or vice versa. We try to predict the context based on the word. Let's see how this is done. So let's say that we fixed some vocabulary W, some collection of words, and we want embeddings of all of these words. Actually, what we are gonna do is to get two embeddings of each word. So for each word W, we'll have an embedding alpha W and another embedding beta W, okay? And these will both be d-dimensional vectors. Why two embeddings instead of one? Well, we'll see that very shortly. Okay? But here's the idea. Let's say that we have a particular word, W0, okay? And now let's look at the context in which it appears. So a few words before and a few words after. We could look at three words before or after or four words before or after, five words before or after. The idea is the same. What we want is that if a particular word is a context word of W0, then their embeddings are close together. In particular, WC is a context word for W0. If that's the case, then their embeddings, let's say, the alpha embedding for WC, should be close to the beta embedding for W0. So in this way, the embeddings capture when one word is a context word for W0. Okay, so how do we get a nice probabilistic model out of this? Well, what we'll say is that for any two words, W0 and WC, the probability that WC appears in the context of W0, in other words, the probability that WC is one of the three words before or after W0, is proportional to e to the dot product between the alpha vector for WC and the beta vector for W0, okay? And at the bottom over here, we have a normalization just to make sure that everything adds up to one. Okay. So now what we need to do is to find these embeddings, these representations, and we do that to maximize log likelihood on a corpus, okay? So let's be a little bit clearer about what that means. So let's say that we're gonna train our embeddings on some corpus of text. Let's say, for example, English Wikipedia. Now, Wikipedia is a collection of many documents but just imagine that we string them together into one truly enormous document, a document of length t, okay? So we're thinking of Wikipedia as one long document of length t. Now let's look at a specific word in the document, word number t, okay? W (indistinct) t. And let's look at a few words before and after, let's say three words before and three words after, the context words. We wanna maximize the probability of those context words given Wt, okay? And we do this for all the words in the corpus. And we want to maximize the probability under this probabilistic model over here. We want to find the embeddings, alpha and beta, that maximize this log likelihood. So this is a very nice way to do things, but there is a small problem over here and that has to do with the optimization. How would we optimize this function? How would we maximize it? Well, the default strategy would just be to use gradient ascent. If we wanted to do that, we would have to find the derivative of this thing. It turns out that in order to compute the derivative, you really need this normalization factor over here. In other words, in order to compute a gradient, you need to compute all of those normalizers, which are sums over the entire vocabulary. That's bad news. It means that these gradient computations are very slow indeed. So how do we get around this? The way around this is to use contrastive learning. It is to replace this problem by a binary classification task, an artificial prediction task. So here's how we'll do it. Let's start by just picking some noise distribution over the vocabulary. For example, this could just be the uniform distribution over all words. Now we go through our corpus, English Wikipedia, and for each word, W0, in the corpus, we pick one of its context words, okay? And we call that a positive example. So we have two words, W0 and a context word, and we give that pair the label +1. That's a positive example. Then we take our W0 and we also pick k random words from this underlying noise distribution. Let's call them W1 through Wk. These are negative examples. These are words that don't belong together, and we give these a label of -1. So our artificial prediction task is a binary classification problem. We're given a pair of words. They have label +1 if they belong together in the same context and they have label -1 if they don't belong together. We create this artificial problem from our unlabeled dataset. And now we solve this binary classification problem, okay? So what we want to do is to maximize the probability of points with label +1, okay? This is the sigmoid function in logistic regression. And we wanna minimize the probabilities for the pairs of words that don't belong together, that have label -1. And now we have a nice optimization problem, one in which there are no unpleasant normalization factors. Solving this problem gives us word embeddings, which enable all sorts of language processing. 