(light electronic music) (air whooshing) - Welcome back. Self-supervised learning is a kind of unsupervised learning that has driven a lot of the recent progress in large language models. So let's see what it's all about. Now, as far as machine learning goes, perhaps the part of the entire field that is best understood is supervised learning from lots of labeled data. So the idea here is that you begin with a large labeled data set. For instance, a collection of animal pictures where each picture has been labeled with the correct species. You then choose a family of classification models that is expressive enough for this particular classification task. So maybe, for instance, you choose a convolutional net of a certain size. And then, you use your labeled data set to train this model. That's it. It works very well. So what's the problem with this whole paradigm? The problem is that this kind of learning is not sustainable because of the requirement for large labeled data sets. This methodology requires us to come up with a new large labeled data set for every prediction problem that we wanna solve. If the problem is something complex, as is the case with essentially all prediction problems we're dealing with nowadays, the data set needs to be especially large. Where is all this data gonna come from? More specifically, where are all these labels gonna come from? What would be much better is if instead, we had some general-purpose representations that were available for all the common types of data. For instance, a general-purpose representation for text data, a general-purpose representation for images, a general-purpose representation for sounds, for DNA sequences, and so on. These would be rich representations that capture a lot of the inherent structure in the data, and using these representations, we would be able to learn much more efficiently with just a little bit of labeled data. How do we get representations like this? Well, this is one of the central preoccupations of unsupervised learning. And we've looked already at various types of representation learning. Let's quickly review some of them. So one of the things that we've been doing in this class is to define various types of structure that might exist in data. For example, data might form clusters or might lie close to a subspace or close to a manifold. In each case, we precisely defined this structure, and we've also talked about algorithms, unsupervised learning algorithms, that can automatically discover this kind of structure, that can uncover the structure in a data set. For instance, we have the k-means algorithm for cluster structure and the isomap algorithm for manifold structure. Once we've uncovered the structure in a data set, we can use it to get an alternative representation of the data. For example, let's say that we use topic modeling. Okay, so let's say that we have a large corpus of documents, say, a large collection of news articles, and we apply unsupervised topic modeling to this corpus of articles. So the topic modeling algorithm looks at this large collection of articles and uncovers an underlying set of topics and then represents each news article as a weighted combination of topics. This gives us a new representation of the data. So the original representation is just the raw document, the raw news article. For example, if this is a bag of words, then the size of the representation is just the size of the vocabulary. If we have a vocabulary of, say, 50,000 English words, then each article is represented by a vector of length 50,000, a bag of words representation. So this, for example, might be a 50,000-dimensional bag of words. But topic modeling gives us an alternative representation. If there are 100 underlying topics, then each article is represented as a distribution over these 100 topics. So this is a 100-dimensional vector. The difference between these two representations is quite dramatic. So first of all, the topic representation is, of course, much lower dimensional. But it's also much richer and more semantic. It really captures a lot of the meaning of the document. And it can be used for various things. For example, we can use the topic representation for similarity search to find other similar articles. Or if we want to build a classifier, we might be much better off using this topic representation than the original representation of the document. We would be able to learn a classifier using much less data. So this is the benefit of a good representation. Now, we also talked about situations where the data has structure, but we don't really have a precise definition for the kind of structure. And in situations like this, one of the things we can do is to use an autoencoder. For instance, we could use a variational autoencoder. In fact, we can even stack up autoencoders. So we have the data at the bottom, and now we apply an autoencoder to get a representation of the data, an encoding or embedding of the data. And then, we can apply another autoencoder to that to get an even higher level representation and then another layer of autoencoder and so on. Autoencoders are very powerful and have been quite successful. But they run into two basic problems. The first problem is difficulty of optimization. So when we are learning an autoencoder, the usual loss function is reconstruction accuracy. We learn an autoencoder so as to maximize reconstruction accuracy. This has an optimization landscape that is riddled with local optima, and it can be quite difficult to find a good solution. The second problem is, in fact, even much more serious. So the issue here is that this loss function, reconstruction accuracy, gives no guidance at all about the kind of structure we're looking for. And as a result, the autoencoder might just end up modeling regularities in the data that are uninteresting. For example, it might end up modeling the background of images rather than the foreground. So what we would like to do is to strike some sort of a balance. We know there's structure in the data. We don't have a precise definition of the structure, but maybe we have an inkling of the kind of structure. Is there some way in which we can guide representation learning, in which we can give a hint or perhaps an example of the kind of structure we're looking for? That's what self-supervised learning is about. So let's turn to it now. So in self-supervised learning, we are looking for a representation that captures structure in data. And yet, we don't have a precise definition for the kind of structure we want. So what we do is that we take our data set, our unlabeled data, and we create an artificial prediction task, an artificial classification problem. So the data itself is unlabeled. There are no labels over there. But we create our own classification problem. And this problem is chosen in such a way that solving the problem implicitly involves capturing or understanding some of the basic structure in the data. There are several types of self-supervised learning. One of them is called contrastive learning. So what happens in contrastive learning is that you start with a data set, an unlabeled data set, say, a collection of images. And the first thing you do is to generate multiple variants of each image. So you have some original image, something like this. And then you generate variants of it. So maybe, for example, you take the image and then you crop a part of it. And then you rotate and then you add some blurring and so on, okay? So in this way, after doing two or three of these operations, you get an altered version of the image, which is often called an augmentation, okay? So you start with your collection of images, and then you generate multiple augmentations, multiple alterations of each image. This gives us a new artificial classification problem. Given two augmentations, did they come from the same image or not? So let's see what we are doing over here. So for each image, for each data point, let's say we generate two variants. So one way we could've done this is to crop part of the image, to rotate, to add some blurring, and other such operations. Okay. So now we create a classification problem, a binary classification problem, in which an instance consists of two augmentations. If they are augmentations of the same image, then we give it a label of plus one. If the augmentations came from different images, then we give it a label of minus one. It's a binary classification problem. So we now solve this problem, and by solving it, we get a representation or embedding of the data. How do we get this exactly? Well, let's say, for example, that we use an architecture like this to solve our binary classification problem. So at the bottom, we have our two images, our two augmentations. What we do is that we pass each of them through the same neural net. Let's call this function f. So there's some neural net f, and we pass the second augmentation through the same neural net. Okay, and so that produces some output layer. And then, we just do logistic regression on top of this output layer to get a final prediction of one or minus one. Okay? So we've created this artificial training set. We didn't have labels to start with, but we created an artificial prediction task. And along the way, we created this artificial classification problem with its own training set. And we train up this function f. Once we do that, we use this top layer as our new representation of images. Why is this a good representation? Well, it's a representation that is able to tell whether two images are the same, even after cropping, blurring, et cetera. It's a very informative representation, a very useful representation for downstream processing. 