(upbeat music) (air whooshing) - So, we've talked about a host of different latent variable models. How do we fit these models to data? Well, the default way of doing this is using the EM algorithm. So, a latent variable model is a probabilistic graphical model in which there are both observable and hidden or latent variables. For instance, we might have a model like this were the shaded nodes represent latent variables, that is variables whose value we never get to see, and the clear nodes represent observable variables. So, given a model like this, let X denote the collection of all observable variables and let Z be the collection of all latent or hidden variables. Now, in a latent variable model, what we have is a family of joint distributions over x and z. This is typically a parameterized family, that is each of the distributions is specified by some parameter, theta. We want to find the very best distribution for our data. The problem is that we never get to see z, we only observe the x's. Okay, so let's say that we have n observations x1 through xn, we wanna find the distribution theta that maximizes the likelihood of our observed data. In other words, that maximizes the log likelihood, the sum from i equals 1 to n of the log likelihood of the i observed point. But what is this? All we have is the joint distribution, how do we get the distribution of just x by itself? Okay, well the distribution of x is obtained by summing out z. We sum over all possible values of z, the joint distribution of x and z. So, when we plug that into this formula, this is what we get. We sum out z, and so this is the expression that we want to maximize. We want to find the theta that maximizes the log likelihood of the observed data. Now unfortunately, this is typically a hard problem to solve. The default way of doing it is using the EM algorithm. So, how does this work? Okay, so we have a parameterized family of joint distributions over x and z. We wanna find the best such distribution, the best theta, but all we get to see are the x's. EM is a local search procedure. It starts with some initial model, let's call it theta 1, for instance, chosen at random. And then it begins a process of iterative improvement. So, we start with theta 1 and we improve it a little to get the next model, theta 2, and then the next model, theta 3, and so on. And it's guaranteed that throughout this process the log likelihood keeps getting better. At some point the process converges and it converges to a local optimum of the log likelihood. So, what is this process? If our current model is theta t, how do we improve it to get the next model theta t plus 1? So, here's what we do. Using our current model, and remember this model is a joint distribution over x and z, we use the model to fill in to infer the missing z values. So, we fill in the z's and now we have complete data, nothing's missing anymore and we fit a new model to this completed joint distribution. That's the overall idea. Okay, so it's quite a simple idea. There are a couple of subtleties. So, let's go ahead and look at this process in a little bit more detail. So, we start off with n data points, say x1, x2, x3, all the way to xn, that's our dataset, we don't get to see the z's. Let p hat be the empirical distribution, that is the distribution that assigns probability mass 1 over n to each observation. So, it says that x1 has probability 1/n, x2 has 1/n, x3 has 1/n, xn has 1/n. So, it's a distribution over the data space that puts probability mass 1/n at each of the x's that are observed. Okay, so now we choose our initial parameters theta 1 at random or in some other way and we begin this process of iterative improvement. So, let's say that our current estimates at time t, let's say our current parameter is theta t, how do we get the next parameter theta t plus 1? What is the improvement step that we performed? So, it turns out that there are two steps that we follow, an E-step and an M-step, hence the name EM. The first step is to fill in the z's, the values that we don't get to see. Okay, it's actually a little bit more subtle than this. So, for each of the observed x's, that is for each of these guys, we compute the distribution over possible z values under our current model. Okay, so we have a current model, theta t, that gives us a joint distribution over x and z. And so, we can look at the conditional distribution, the distribution of z given x. We then combine it with the empirical distribution to get a joint distribution over x and z. So, the joint distribution over x and z at time t is just the empirical distribution over x times the distribution over z given that particular x under our current model. So, this is a joint distribution over x and z at time t. That's the E-step. And in order to perform this step, all we need to be able to do is this inference step. For each of the observed x's, we have to be able to figure out the distribution over possible z's. Okay, the M-step then takes this distribution, this joint distribution, and fits a model to it. Okay, so the our next model, theta t plus 1, is simply the model that maximizes likelihood on this joint distribution. Okay, so this joint distribution has nothing hidden. The x's are there, the z's are there, and we just find the model theta t plus 1 that maximizes likelihood on the joint distribution, so we sum over all x and z. This is our joint distribution at time t over x and z, and we wanna find the model theta that maximizes likelihood on this joint distribution. Okay, and we keep iterating these E and M-steps until the process converges. So, in many cases of interest, these two steps are actually very easy. And so, we have a nice convenient way of fitting latent variable models. In fact, much of the reason for the wide use, the success, and popularity of latent variable models is the availability of this nice algorithm for learning these models. 