(gentle music) - We'll now do a brief tour of latent variable models and along the way, hopefully get comfortable with specifying these models graphically. So the first latent variable model that we saw was the mixture of Gaussians. This is a model of cluster data. A mixture of k Gaussians is given by a set of mixing weights, which says what fraction of the data belongs to each of the clusters and then a Gaussian distribution for each of the k clusters. Sampling from this distribution is a two-step process. First, we choose a cluster labeled Z. This is a number in the range one to k. And so to specify the distribution over Z, we just need to specify the probabilities of each of the clusters pi one through pi k. The distribution of this kind is often called a categorical distribution. That is a discrete distribution over a finite set of outcomes. A distribution of this type is easy to specify. Just give the probability of each of the outcomes. Once we've chosen the cluster label, we get our observation X by simply sampling from the corresponding Gaussian. So the overall graphical model of this process is that we choose the cluster labeled Z, and then given Z, we select X. At the end of the day, X is the only thing that's observable. Z remains latent or hidden. The next latent variable model that we turned to was the Hidden Markov model. This is a model of sequence data. So Hidden Markov models, or HMMs, are specified by an initial distribution over states pi, distributions for each of the k states P one through Pk, and a matrix A that gives transition probabilities between states. The graphical model for a Hidden Markov model is shown over here. To sample from one of these models, we first choose the starting state Z one from the underlying distribution pi, the distribution over starting states. This is a categorical distribution. It's a distribution over k possible states, over k possible outcomes. Once we have the first state, we choose element X one from the probability distribution corresponding to state Z one. Then we choose the next state, Z two, and to do that, we use the transition matrix A. Since we are currently in state Z one, the Z one row of the transition matrix is a categorical distribution that gives us the probabilities of transitioning to the k states. And we select the next state from that row, from the categorical distribution specified by the Z one row of the A matrix. Once we have Z two, that is to say, the state at time two, we select X two from the distribution corresponding to that state, and so on. So at the end of the day, it's the Xs that are observable. And the Zs are latent. So this is a latent variable model. Another common latent variable model is factor analysis. This is a probabilistic model of data that lies close to a subspace. Hm, well, PCA finds subspaces for us. How is this different? So the key point is that PCA gives us a subspace. Principle component analysis gives us a subspace, but it doesn't give us a distribution over the subspace and close to the subspace. For that, we use factor analysis. So let's say that our data lie in d dimensional space R sub d, but we suspect that they lie close to a k-dimensional subspace. A factor analysis model is specified using three parameters. Mu is a vector in Rd. W is a matrix of size d by k. And sigma is a covariance matrix of size d by d. The first two of these parameters specify a subspace. Okay, so the subspace that they specify is the set of all points mu plus WZ as Z varies over Rk. So this is a k-dimensional subspace that lies in Rd. So you can think of a point Z down here in k-dimensional space that gets lifted up to mu plus W times Z, a point in d dimensional space. Okay, so that's the subspace, but how do we get a distribution? So here's the overall generative process. We begin by sampling a point Z down here in Rk, and we sample it from a k-dimensional Gaussian distribution. Okay, so that's our latent point Z. We then lift it to d-dimensional space. And then we sample from a Gaussian distribution centered at this point, but with covariance matrix sigma. Now sigma is a full d-by-d covariance matrix. As a result, the final point X that we get might not lie on the subspace, but we can choose the covariance matrix in such a way that the point lies very close to the subspace. So the final distribution does not look like a flat subspace. Rather it looks like a fat pancake. It's a fat pancake that's concentrated near a k-dimensional subspace of Rd. Now, if we were to draw this as a graphical model, we'd have our latent vector Z, which we don't get to observe. We start by sampling Z, and then based on Z, we sample X, which is what we actually get to see. When we want to fit a model like this to data, all we get is a bunch of observations X. But from these observations, we can infer the subspace and also the distribution. Now, sometimes data doesn't lie close to a linear subspace but rather close to a low-dimensional curved surface, a low-dimensional manifold, maybe something like this. Okay, so we might have data that lies close to a surface like this. Now, since it's not a subspace, factor analysis is not appropriate, but we can use a mixture of factor analyzers. What does that mean? Well, remember that a single-factor analysis model gives a distribution that's rather like a fat pancake. Well, we can take this curve here and approximate it using a mixture of pancakes. We can have one pancake over here, one pancake over here, one pancake over here, and one pancake over here. We get a mixture of four pancakes, a mixture of four factor analyzers. So what do we need to specify a distribution of this kind? So in this case, we have a mixture of four factor analyzers, so we have m equals four. For each of these factor analysis models, we have a mu vector and a W matrix. These specify a linear subspace. So we have m of these, in our case, four of these. We have a covariance matrix that specifies the distribution around each of these subspaces. And then we also have mixing weights pi, where pi one is the fraction of data from the first pancake, and pi two is the fraction of data in the second pancake. And pi three is the fraction of data in the third pancake, and so on. So in order to sample from one of these models, we follow this process. First, we choose a pancake. We choose one of the m factor analysis models. Okay, so we let J be the index of the pancake. It's a number in the range one to m, and we choose it from the categorical distribution pi. Pi is a distribution over one through m. Okay, so that tells us the pancake. Then we choose a latent vector in the low k dimensional space. We lift the vector up to the relevant subspace, the subspace for the J pancake, and then sample from a Gaussian with covariant sigma centered at that point. Okay, so the graphical model for this process looks like this. First, we choose J. That's the pancake number. That tells us the index of the factor analysis model. Then we choose a vector Z in k-dimensional space, a low-dimensional latent vector. And then based on the two of these, we get X. So the only thing we actually get to observe is X, whereas these two are latent variables. So this is a nice model of data that lies close to a low-dimensional manifold. It's called the mixture of factor analyzers. Now, there are lots and lots of other latent variable models that are in common use. There are topic models, which are models of collections of documents, for example, collections of news articles or collections of articles from scientific journals. There are image models, which are models of natural images. There are social network models, which model how information gets propagated in a social network. There are phylogenetic models that model the process of evolution, and many more. In each of these cases, the methodology is the same. We begin by defining a probabilistic model that captures relevant structure. This model is usually drawn graphically and has a combination of observed variables and latent variables. We then fit the model to observed data. How do we do this? How do we fit a general latent variable model to data? The usual way to do it is using the EM algorithm, and we'll talk about that next. 