(lively music) (screen whooshing) - We've talked about mixtures of Gaussians, which are latent variable models used for clustering data. Now let's turn to a different latent variable model, the hidden Markov model. This is used to model sequence data. In a lot of applications, data comes in the form of sequences. That is to say each data point is a sequence of elements or a time series. In this picture, for example, we see a speech signal, a one-dimensional time series. This particular speech signal corresponds to somebody saying a full sentence. Now, a sentence is composed of individual words and each word is in turn composed of a sequence of basic sounds called phonemes. So for instance, the word tomato consists of six phonemes, a Ta sound, an ow sound, a ma sound, an aa sound, a ta sound, and then another ow sound. Tomato is a concatenation of six basic sounds, six phonemes. Now, there are other ways to say this word, for example, tomato. And these alternative pronunciations correspond to different strings of phonemes. In English, there's a total of about 40 to 60 phonemes, 40 to 60 basic sounds. Now, one good strategy for speech recognition is to take a speech signal and for each part of the signal to identify what phoneme is being uttered at that time. Once we have the phonemes, we can try to reconstruct the words and sentences. Here's a closeup of another speech signal. This corresponds to somebody saying the three words should we chase? So this part of the signal is the sha sound. This is an O sound, and this is a da sound. Should, this is the E sound in we, this is the ah sound in chase and so on. So looking at this signal, we see that the task of mapping a piece of the signal to the phoneme that's being uttered there is not that easy. It looks like it might be easiest in these parts of the signal. These are the parts of the signal where the structure seems the most pronounced. These are the parts that correspond to vowel sounds. Now, how do we represent a signal like this? Well, the typical thing to do is to look at a particular window, maybe this one. Let's say we look at windows of size 25 milliseconds and then to the signal inside that window, we apply various filters, various linear functions, okay? So when we take a linear function of that window, it gives us one number, like maybe 2.3, and we apply a bunch of linear functions, so maybe negative 1.6, 3.9, and so on. If we apply 10 linear functions, then we get a 10-dimensional vector for that specific window of speech. And then we move over to another window, typically overlapping and then we get another 10-dimensional vector for it and then we move over to the next window and get another 10 dimensional vector and so on. And so what we end up with is a sequence of elements, each of which is a 10 dimensional vector, a sequence of 10 dimensional vectors. Now, the ordering of these vectors is really important in decoding the speech. So we are in a situation where each data point, each speech signal is a sequence of vectors. We'll call each of these an element of the sequence. Now, for simplicity, let's just say that these vectors happen to be two dimensional and let's say they look like this. So this is the first element of the sequence. This is the second element, and so on on, and what we've done here is to plot the first 15 elements. It looks like they form three clusters. There seems to be a cluster over here, a cluster over here and a cluster over here. If this speech signal is the first part of say somebody saying the word tomato, then this cluster might actually correspond to the ta phoneme and this cluster might correspond to the ow phoneme and this cluster might correspond to the ma phoneme. So when a particular element, when a particular window of speech lies in this cluster, it's likely that the next element will also be in the same cluster simply because it's a continuation of the same sound. It's another part of the same sound. Occasionally a jump will be made to another cluster. In this case, the jump occurs from X5 to X6 where we transition from the ta sound to the ow sound. So once we're at X6, we've started the ow sound and the next element, X7, is likely to be in the same cluster and similarly, with X8, X9, and so on. Now, we've gonna think of each of these clusters as states. So in this case, we have three states, S1, let's call them S1, S2, and S3. Now, when we are in state S1, if our current element is in S1, it's pretty likely that the next element in the sequence will also be in S1. Let's say that there is an 80% probability that the next element will also be in S1. Otherwise, there's a 20% probability of transitioning to state S2 to cluster S2. Once we're in cluster S2, there's maybe a 90% probability of remaining in that cluster and a 10% probability of transitioning to cluster S3 and so on. This diagram over here contains information that is simply not part of the row cluster structure over here. What we have here is temporal information, information about transitions between clusters. This is a key part of hidden Markov models. So let's go ahead now and formalize what a hidden Markov model is. So a hidden Markov model is a probabilistic model of sequence data. There are several components to the model. First, we have a collection of states. These are clusters. Let's say we have K of them, cluster number one through cluster number K. We're gonna call them states, state one through state K. Each of these states or clusters has an associated distribution. So P1 is the distribution associated with cluster number one. It is the distribution say of this cluster over here. So P1 could be a Gaussian or it could be some other distribution. PK is the distribution associated with state number K. So this tells us that we have K clusters and each of the clusters, each of the states has an associated distribution. Then we have some information about transitions between these states. We have temporal information. So there are two pieces of information. First of all, we have an initial distribution over states. So when we begin our sequence, when we look at the very first element of the sequence, what state does it belong to? It will be in state number one with probability pi one, state number two with probability pi two and state number K with probability pi sub K. So these pis are probabilities that add up to one. So that tells us about the starting state, the state that we begin in. Now we also need information about transitions between states. If our current element is in state i, what is our next state going to be? So we represent this by a K by K matrix where A sub ij is the probability that if the current element is in state i, then the next element is in state j. It's the probability of transitioning from state i to state j. So this is a K by K matrix and if we're in state i, we have to go somewhere. So we have that when we sum over j, Aij has to add up to one. So these are the different components of a hidden Markov model or HMM. Now, this is a probabilistic model over sequences. If we wanted to sample a sequence from this model, how would we do that? So we wanna sample a particular sequence, X. The first thing we do is to pick our starting state, Z1. So Z1 is gonna be some number in the range one to K. It tells us which state we start in, okay? And we pick it according to the distribution pi. Once we have the starting state, we pick X1 from the distribution associated with that state, the distribution for state Z1. So we've generated X1. Then we choose the next state, Z2, according to the transition probabilities and we pick the next observation X2 from the distribution associated with state Z2 and so on. And in this way, we generate an entire sequence. Now, the graphical model corresponding to this generative process looks like this. We start with Z1, which is a number from one to K. It's the starting state and we sample it from the starting distribution pi. Once we have Z1, we sample the first element X1 from the distribution associated with Z1. Now we figure out the next state. We use the transition matrix for this. We look at the row of the transition matrix corresponding to our previous state Z1 and we sample our next state, Z2, from those probabilities. And then we get our next element, X2, from the distribution corresponding to state Z2 and so on. And in this way, we can generate T elements. Now, at the end of the day, the only thing that we get to see is the sequence. So the part that's observable is X1 through XT, the Zs, the underlying states are hidden, they're latent. And so this is a latent variable model. Now, one thing worth pointing out about this picture over here is that it is a tree. And that's good news because one thing that we talked about earlier is that when you have a graphical model that's in the form of a tree, inference with it is typically easy. And indeed, that's the case with hidden Markov models as well. So what are some of the inference questions that we typically want to ask or to answer when it comes to hidden Markov models? So one of the questions we have is given a particular sequence of elements X1 one through XT, so for example, a sound signal, what is the probability of that signal? Now, how would we want this? So here's an example. Let's say we build a hidden Markov model for every word in the English language. That's a lot of words, lots of hidden Markov models. Now we get a speech signal corresponding to a word and we want to figure out which word it is. Well, we run it through all these hidden Markov models, and for each one, we ask what is the probability of that speech sound given this particular word? And we select the word for which this probability is highest. Another kind of query that we might have is given a sequence of elements X1 through XT, what is the state at a particular time T? In the speech case, what this would tell us is what phoneme is being uttered at a particular time. Another question we might have is given a sequence X1 through XT, what is the most likely underlying sequence of states? In the speech setting, that would mean given the speech signal, what is the most likely underlying string of phonemes? What's the most likely reconstruction of the underlying sequence of phonemes? Now, all of these questions can be answered efficiently because the graphical model has a tree structure. So the final thing is to actually learn these models. So let's say we have a bunch of sequences, for example, a collection of sound signals and we wanna fit a hidden Markov model to this data. Now, hidden Markov models are probability models. So what we can ask for is the maximum likelihood hidden Markov model. We wanna find the hidden Markov model that makes the data maximally likely, okay? So we want to find the starting distribution pi, the transition probabilities A and the individual state distributions, P sub j. We wanna find all these parameters and we wanna find them in such a way as to maximize the likelihood of the data. Now, as is common in unsupervised learning, this learning problem is NP-hard. However, there is a nice EM algorithm for it. Now wait, we talked about EM for mixtures of Gaussians but now we're talking about hidden Markov models. What is the connection? Well, it turns out that EM is a general purpose learning algorithm that is a heuristic for finding the maximum likelihood latent variable model for a very, very general class of latent variable models. We will later see EM in its full generality. But for the time being, let's just get a very rough idea of what EM looks like for hidden Markov models. So as always, EM is a local search procedure. We begin with some guess of the various parameters, for example, chosen at random, and then we begin a process of local improvement where we take our current parameters and improve them a little bit and then improve them some more and so on. And the whole time, the log likelihood keeps improving. And we keep doing this until we converge to a local optimum of the log likelihood. So at any given time, we have some current estimate of the parameters. Using this estimate and using our inference procedures, we take a look at our data and we say, well, for each of these data sequences, what is the underlying sequence of states? Once we have that information, we can figure out how much time is spent in each state? What is the distribution of Xs in that state? What is the starting distribution over states? We compute all these statistics and we use these to update the current set of parameters and we keep doing this until the process converges. So this is a nice, easy algorithm, and in fact, the ease of use of hidden Markov models is one of the key things that has made it a very popular way of modeling sequence data, especially in signal processing and in modeling biological sequences. 