(light digital music) - We have been talking about some rather sophisticated probabilistic models such as base nets and Markov random fields. Together, these are called graphical models. Now in a graphical model, the variables do not all have to be observable. There can be some variables that are hidden or latent. When we have latent variables in a probabilistic model, we call it a latent variable model. Now perhaps the most common latent variable model is the mixture of Gaussians. So let's start by taking a look at it. The mixture of Gaussians is a popular way of clustering data. So here, for example, we have a small dataset. What are the clusters? Well, for instance, this looks pretty good. This looks like a reasonable way to cluster the data. Notice that in this case, the clusters are not spherical and therefore the k-means algorithm might have trouble discovering them. But for a mixture of Gaussians, this is no problem at all. In a Gaussian mixture model, each cluster has its own Gaussian distribution. So each cluster is associated with a Gaussian distribution specified by its mean and covariance matrix. And each cluster also has a mixing weight, which says what fraction of the overall data belongs to that cluster. So let's, for example, look at this cluster over here. Let's call this cluster number one. The mean of this cluster is mu1 and that's gonna be this two dimensional point right here. This point is the mean of the cluster mu1. What about the covariance matrix of this cluster? Well, the Gaussian looks like it's axis aligned. It's not tilted up or down. And it looks like the stretch in the horizontal direction is roughly three times the stretch in the vertical direction. So maybe the covariance matrix is something like this, 9, 0, 0, 1. It's a two by two matrix since the data is two dimensional. The off diagonal entries are zero since the Gaussian is not tilted up or down that doesn't seem to be a correlation between the features. And the numbers along the diagonal are the variances in each of those directions. Now this Gaussian also has a mixing weight. In this particular case, it looks like roughly a quarter of the data belongs to that cluster. And so we'd say that it's mixing weight by 1 is .25. In this way, we specify a Gaussian and a mixing weight for each of the clusters and we end up with a mixture of four Gaussians. Now when we put these Gaussians together, we get a distribution over the entire space where the probability of any point x is its probability under cluster one plus its probability under cluster two all the way to its probability on the last cluster. So when we fit a mixture of Gaussians to data, we get two things. We get a clustering of the data and a description of each cluster by a Gaussian but we also get a distribution over the entire dataset. So we get distribution modeling and clustering all in one. Now let's look at the mixture of Gaussians a little bit more closely and let's see how we would generate a random point from one of these mixtures. So let's say we have a mixture of k Gaussians. So the first Gaussian has a mixing weight by 1, which says what fraction of the data comes from that Gaussian, and this is the Gaussian itself and then we have the k Gaussian. Now in order to sample from this mixture model, the first thing we do is to pick a cluster. So we pick a cluster, something in the range 1 to k and let's call that z. z is the cluster index. So we pick cluster one with probability by 1, cluster two with probability by 2, cluster k with probability by k. Once we picked a cluster, then we pick a data point from the Gaussian associated with that cluster. So we pick a data point x from the Gaussian indexed by z. So the overall process looks like this. We first pick a cluster z in the range 1 to k. And given the cluster, we then pick x a data point from that cluster. Now at the end of the day, all we get to see is x. So x is observed. We don't get to see the cluster label z, that's hidden or latent. And so this is the graphical model corresponding to our latent variable model. So let's say that we have this mixture of Gaussians over here. And we have a particular point x. We don't get to see z. Can we infer it? Can we infer the most likely cluster for that particular x? Well, let's see. So the probability that the cluster is j given an observation x is simply the probability, the joint probability of cluster j and observation x divided by the probability of observation x. This is just the definition of conditional probability. And let's see, the numerator is the probability of being in cluster j, which is by j times the probability of observing x in cluster j, which is p sub j of x. And remember, p sub j is a Gaussian distribution given by mu j and sigma j. What is the probability of x? Well, we simply sum up all possible clusters. The cluster could be any l from 1 to k and so we sum up pi sub l times p sub l of x. So given a mixture model. And given a particular point, we have a relatively simple formula for the probability that that points cluster is cluster number j. If we had to choose a cluster, we would simply pick a j for which this is maximized. So given x, we can figure out what cluster it belongs to. Now a mixture of Gaussians is typically used for clustering a dataset. So how do we do this exactly? Well, let's say we have n data points called an x1 through xn. They are say D dimensional vectors. In order to cluster this data, we are gonna fit a mixture model to it, a mixture of k Gaussians. That means we have to figure out what all these parameters are. We have to figure out by pi 1 through pi k, the fraction of data that belongs to each cluster, and the distributions of each of the clusters, mu 1 sigma 1 through mu k sigma k. How do we do this? Well, the key point is that the mixture model gives us a distribution over the data space. So what we can do is to pick the maximum likelihood mixture model that is the set of parameters that maximizes the probability of our observed data, okay? So we wanna find the parameters that maximize the probability of the data. That is the probability of data point one times the probability of data point two times the probability of data point three, and so on. That's what we have in this expression here. This is the product as i goes from 1 to n of the probability of the i data point, x sub i under the mixture model. When we plug in the Gaussian distributions for pi 1, for p1 through pk, we get this expression over here. So given our data points, xi, we wanna find the parameters, the pi's, the mu's, and the sigmas that maximize this expression. We wanna find the maximum likelihood mixture of Gaussians. How do we do this? Well, maximizing the likelihood is the same as maximizing the log of the likelihood, the log likelihood. And that's the same as minimizing the negative log-likelihood. That's this function over here. This is our loss function. This is the thing we want to minimize. We want to find the parameters by mu and sigma that minimize this function. What kind of a problem is this? Is this a nice convex problem? Unfortunately not. The loss surface looks a little bit more like this. It's riddled with local optima. Finding the global optimum is NP-hard. So we don't expect to be able to do it on a consistent basis. But we do have a very nice algorithm called the EM algorithm, which is a heuristic that is guaranteed to get us to some local optimum. So let's see how this algorithm works. This is the EM algorithm where EM stands for expectation maximization. In spirit, it's actually rather a lot like Lloyd's k-means algorithm, okay? So the way EM works is that we start by initializing all the parameters, the pi's, the mu's, the sigmas in some arbitrary way. And then we begin a hill climbing or local search process in which we slowly improve these parameters a little bit at a time. In each step throughout this entire process, the log likelihood keeps improving and we keep doing this until the process converges at some local optimum of the log likelihood. Okay, so now let's look at the process in a bit more detail. So we start by initializing all of the parameters in some way. For instance, we could simply say that the initial weights are 1 over k. So our initial guess is that all clusters contain about an equal fraction of the data. We could choose the initial centers at random from our dataset and we also have to choose initial covariance matrices. What we could do is to just set all of these to the covariance of the entire dataset. Okay, so we initialize these parameters somehow and then we get begin this process of small improvements and we keep repeating the process until convergence. Now in each loop, there are two steps. The first step is to cluster our data given the current parameters. So we have our current set of parameters, the pi's and the k Gaussians, p1 through pk. And we use these current parameters to cluster the data. Now we do this in an interesting way. Okay, so let's say that we have a data point x sub i and let's say there are four clusters, one, two, three, and four. Rather than assigning x sub i definitively to one of these clusters, rather than saying that, "Oh, x sub i belongs to cluster number two," we instead divide x sub i fractionally between these clusters. So for example, maybe we'd say that x sub i gives .8 of its weight to cluster number one, it gives .05 of its weight to cluster number two, it gives .1 of its weight to cluster number three, and it gives the remaining .05 of its weight to cluster number four. What are these weights over here? Well, these weights are simply the probability that the cluster is one given x sub i under the current model. Okay, so these are the weights over here. It's the probability that the unknown cluster, which we were calling z is cluster number j given data point xi. And given our current model and we've already seen an expression for this. This is the expression we derived earlier. So this is what we call a soft clustering of the data. A fractional assignment of data points to clusters. Once we have this soft clustering, we then update all of the parameters. So we update the mixing weight of cluster j to be the fraction of data that we have assigned to cluster j. So this is the sum overall data points i equals 1 to n of the weight that the i point assigns to cluster j. So this is the total weight assigned to cluster j divided by n. That's our update for the mixing weight of cluster j. The updated mean for cluster j is simply the weighted average of all points assigned to cluster j. And likewise, the updated covariance for cluster j is the weighted covariance of all points assigned to cluster j. And we keep repeating this process until convergence. So this is a nice simple algorithm. And in fact, a whole lot like Lloyd's k-means algorithm. In fact, one reason for the popularity of mixture of Gaussians is the availability of a simple procedure like this for fitting these models. Let's end with a little example. So here we have a dataset in two dimensions and it looks like there are three clusters over here. It looks like we have a cluster here, a cluster here, and a cluster over here, okay? So let's go ahead and try to cluster this data. And let's start actually with the k-means algorithm. Let's see what k means would do. So here's the k-means solution. It puts one cluster here, one here, and one over here. Not a very good solution. Now if you recall, k means depends on the way in which it's initialized. So when you run it multiple times, you could get different answers each time. So maybe we just got unlucky this time. Let's try again. So this is the second attempt with k means. This time it's put one cluster here, one here, and one here. Also not good. Let's try again. This time, it has one cluster here, one here, and one here. That's a little better, but it's messed up this cluster. Now let's try it with mixture of Gaussians. So we use the EM algorithm and it gets a near perfect clustering straight away, okay? So what helped is that in a mixture of Gaussians, we allow each cluster to have an arbitrary ellipsoidal shape and that's exactly the flexibility that we need in order to cluster a dataset like this. Okay, so that's it for the mixture of Gaussians. It's a latent variable model that is extremely popular for clustering data. 