(bright corporate music) (graphics whooshing) - Now, we've been talking a lot about Bayesian estimation, where the first step is always to put a prior distribution on the parameter that is being estimated. In choosing the prior, we've advocated using a conjugate prior. If we do this, it ensures that the posterior distribution is always well-behaved. It always lies in the same class as the prior, which is a huge convenience in practice, but sometimes, we just need to use priors that are not conjugate. What happens then? So suppose, for instance, that we are estimating the bias of a coin, let's call it theta. So theta is some value in the range [0, 1], and the first thing we need to do is to put a prior on theta. For this, we choose a distribution q0 on the interval [0, 1]. Now, a good choice would be to use a beta prior, because if we do that, the posterior distribution will also be a beta no matter what observations we get. In fact, we could also use a prior that is a mixture of betas, in which case, the posterior would also be a mixture of betas, but let's say that we don't choose either of these options. Let's say that we use a completely different type of prior, maybe something like this. So let's say that our prior over theta, our distribution on the interval [0, 1], looks strange, maybe something like this. What would be the ramifications of this choice? What would happen? Would we still be able to do Bayesian inference? Well, let's say that we subsequently make a bunch of observations, let's say we do n observations, and each of them turn turn out heads and T turn out tails. The posterior distribution is then, as always, proportional to the prior times the likelihood, which in this case, is theta to the H and one minus theta to the T. So we know what the posterior looks like. We might not know this particular constant of proportionality, but now, the posterior will not be a simple beta distribution, for example, it could be something rather weird, and so how could we then answer questions that we are interested in? Like, what is the probability that theta is less than a half? So there are two approaches that are quite natural. One is to actually take our continuous parameter space and try to discretize it. So we take the continuous interval, [0, 1] and we can discretize it by putting a fine gridding of say, 1,000 points, maybe something like this, and so we take this continuous distribution and make it discreet, and then we can compute the posterior at the same thousand values of theta. So that would work, but there are two issues with that approach. The first is that this discretization introduces an approximation error that could be hard to control. The second is that this is only feasible in low dimensional cases like this. In this example, for example, theta is one-dimensional. If theta were higher dimensional, it would not be practical to discretize theta so finely. A more general approach, and a much more usable approach, is to sample from the posterior. It turns out that as long as we know the form of the posterior, even if we don't know the proportionality constant, it is possible to sample from the posterior, that is, to generate samples theta from the posterior distribution. We could generate lots of such samples, and if we wanted to answer a question like, what is the probability that theta is less than a half, we could simply count the fraction of our samples that are less than a half. In fact, it will turn out that sampling is a key primitive in probabilistic, unsupervised learning, and we will be talking a whole lot more about it very soon. 