(bright music) - Hello, everybody, and welcome back. Now, traditionally, there have been two competing approaches to statistical estimation, the frequentist approach and the Bayesian approach, and in fact, there's been a sort of ideological divide between the two. When it comes to machine learning, this ideological divide has somewhat dissipated, and in fact, it's common to combine the two approaches, often in creative ways. In this class, we'll mostly be doing frequentist estimation, in fact, that's all we've been doing so far, but now let's take a look at the Bayesian way. So let's return to our standard problem. We have a collection of data, X one through XN, and we wanna fit a distribution to it. Now, this distribution is typically chosen from some family and parameterized by say, theta. For instance, if we are fitting a Gaussian to the data, then theta would consist of the mean and variance of the Gaussian. So in the case of Gaussians, this parameter of theta consists of the mean and the variance, and theta is the thing that we want to estimate. Now, the frequentist approach is to treat theta as an unknown quantity of course, but also as a quantity that is non-random, that is to say theta is not a random variable. It doesn't have a distribution. It's just an unknown value that we want to estimate, and the way we typically estimate it is by choosing the single value of theta that has the highest likelihood, that is, the value of theta that makes the data seem maximally likely. So this expression over here is what we call the likelihood, and in the frequentist approach, we typically choose the value of theta that maximizes this likelihood. Now, the Bayesian approach is very different in spirit. Once again, Bayesians treat theta as unknown, but the big difference is that for Bayesians, theta is a random variable. That means that it has some prior distribution, which we'll call Q zero. So in the absence of any data at all, we think of theta as having this distribution Q zero. Once we see some observations, say, X one through XN, we update the distribution and get a posterior distribution. We are gonna call that Q sub N of theta, that is, the updated distribution on theta after seeing N observations. What is this updated distribution? What is the probability of any particular value of theta, given the data that we've seen? Well, using the formula for conditional probability, this is the probability of theta and the data we've seen, divided by the probability of the data, and then we can apply the formula for conditional probability again, to say that the numerator is just the probability of theta, that is, the prior probability of theta times the probability of the data observations given theta, and the denominator stays the same. This is the posterior distribution on theta. We see that it's equal to the probability of theta, that is, the prior times the likelihood divided by some expression that does not depend on theta, okay? So we say that the posterior is proportional to the prior times the likelihood, and this sign over here means proportional to. It means that we've left out some normalizing factor, in this case, that constant probability X one through XN, which does not involve theta at all. Okay, so let's summarize. We have some parameter of theta that we want to estimate. For a frequentist, theta is non-random. There's no distribution on theta. Instead, we estimate a single value of theta, the value that maximizes the likelihood. For a Bayesian on the other hand, theta is a random variable with a prior distribution. When we take the data into account, we get an entire posterior distribution of theta, and the posterior is equal to the prior times the likelihood times some normalizing constant. Okay, before we delve further into Bayesianism, let me just mention a couple of references in case you are intrigued by the Bayesian approach. So the first book over here is called "Bayesian Data Analysis," and it's basically a practical guide to data analysis in the Bayesian way. The second book is called "Machine learning: a Probabilistic Perspective." This isn't an exclusively Bayesian book per se, but it's a very comprehensive overview of probabilistic machine learning, and as such, it includes a whole lot of Bayesian methods as well. Both of these books are highly recommended. Okay, now let's look at an example of Bayesian estimation. One question that has always intrigued people is what fraction of human births are female? Is it really 50/50? To study this, the French mathematician Laplace looked at children born in Paris during the 25 year period from 1745 to 1770. During this period, the number of children born was 493,472, and of them, 241,945 were girls, so the fraction of girls was 49%. Hmm, that's less than 50%. Is the discrepancy significant? In order to figure that out, we need to do some math. Okay, so let theta denote the probability that a child is female. Theta is the thing that we hope to estimate. Now, we've collected some observations. Let N be our number of observations, in our case, it is 493,000, and let's say that of these observations, we have F females and M males. Then F follows a binomial distribution with parameter theta, that is to say F is equivalent to taking a coin of biased theta and tossing it N times. Okay, now, Laplace wanted to take a Bayesian approach to inference, so what he needed to do first and foremost was to put a prior on theta. In the Bayesian approach, the parameter to be estimated is a random variable, and so before we do anything else, we need a prior distribution on that variable. What distribution to use? Well, theta is a probability. It lies in the range zero to one. And what Laplace said is, well, he didn't really want to make any assumptions about theta, so he said, "Let's just say that theta has a uniform distribution. It's equally likely to be any value in this range." So the prior looks like this. Any value in the range zero to one is equally likely, a uniform prior. Now, based on the data, the question he asked is what is the probability that theta, that is to say, the fraction of female births, is less than 0.5? So we'll get to this calculation in a second, but before we do that, there's one point that I wanna make, which is that this very question asking about the probability that theta is less than 0.5, this question can only be asked by a Bayesian. For a frequentist, this question makes no sense. Theta is not a random variable for a frequentist. It does not have a distribution. It is not possible to talk about the probability of theta being something or something else, so this is a question that only a Bayesian can pose. Okay, so let's go ahead and compute the solution. So quick recap, we are estimating theta. Theta is the fraction of female births. The prior distribution on theta is uniform. We say theta is equally likely to be anything in the range zero to one. And now we make N observations with F females and M males, so what is the posterior distribution? So let's see, the posterior distribution over theta is proportional to the prior times the likelihood, okay? So the prior is the prior distribution, Q zero of theta, and the likelihood is the probability of our data, our observations, given theta. Okay, now, the prior in our case is uniform. The likelihood, well, we have a binomial distribution, so if the parameter is theta, the probability of having F females is N choose F, theta to the F, one minus theta to the M. It is the usual binomial likelihood. Now let's just focus on the terms containing theta, okay? So this is proportional to theta to the F, one minus theta to the M. All other terms, terms that don't involve theta are multiplicative constants. Let's not worry about them, okay? Let's just look at this. We'll say that the posterior is proportional to this function of theta. Now, it turns out that this distribution is actually something well known. So Q sub N is, in fact, a well-known distribution. It is the beta distribution. It's a beta distribution with parameters F plus one and M plus one. We'll be talking a lot about the beta distribution very soon, but for the time being, the fact that we know this distribution makes it now possible to compute statistics about it, okay? And for example, the probability that theta is greater than or equal to 0.5, let's say, is the integral from 0.5 to one of the distribution of theta D theta. And when we do this, it turns out to be approximately 10 to the minus 42, that is to say under the Bayesian analysis, the probability that a child is female is overwhelmingly likely to be less than 0.5. 