(soft music) - Last time we introduced the Bayesian approach to statistical estimation. And in doing so, we ran right into the beta distribution. What is this distribution exactly? The beta is a distribution on the interval 0, 1. It has two parameters, let's call them alpha and beta, that are both real numbers greater than zero. Under this distribution, the probability of any value X, and here X is something between zero and one, is equal to X to the alpha minus one times one minus X to the beta minus one times this thing in front, which is just a normalizing factor. So that initial part is not that important. It's just a normalizing factor that's there to make sure that this density integrates to one. What is this strange symbol over here? Well, that's a capital gamma. And in fact, the gamma function is defined by this integral. It's a little strange, so let me just make couple of comments about it. The gamma function is a generalization of the factorial. Now, the factorial, two factorial, three factorial, four factorial, et cetera, is something that's restricted to positive integers. The gamma function is a generalization that can be used for any real number. And it turns out that in generalizing it, you end up with an integral of this form. A useful fact about the gamma is that it satisfies this equation, which is reminiscent of the factorial. Okay, so enough about the normalizing factor. Let's focus on the important part, which is this over here. Now, as a result of this functional form, it turns out that the beta distribution has the following statistics. The mean is alpha over alpha plus beta, and of course, this is something in the range 0, 1. And we can also write down explicit expressions for the mode and the variants. Now, this is a whole lot of symbols. And perhaps the easiest way to get a sense of the beta distribution is actually just to look at some pictures of it. So here we have six beta distributions. Let's start with the one at the top left, which is the beta 1, 1 distribution. So like any beta, it is a distribution on the interval zero to one, and in this case, we see that it is the uniform distribution. So the uniform distribution over 0, 1 is in fact the beta distribution. It is the beta 1, 1 distribution. What is the mean of this distribution? Well, just looking at it, it seems like the mean must be a half. But let's recall our formula. We said that the beta distribution with parameters alpha, beta has mean alpha over alpha plus beta. And so in this case, the beta 1, 1 indeed has mean a half. Now, in the next picture, we have the beta 2, 2 distribution. This, again, has a mean of a half. And over here, we have the beta 10, 10 distribution, which again, has a mean of a half. But we see that as we're moving to the right, we have the same mean, but the distribution becomes more and more concentrated around the mean. So let's say that we want to estimate the bias of a coin. If we put a beta 1, 1 prior on the bias, we're saying that the bias of the coin is equally likely to be anything in the range 0, 1. If we put a beta 10, 10 prior on the bias of the coin, what we're saying is that we think the bias is close to a half, but it's equally likely to be above a half or below a half. Now let's move to the second row of beta densities. We have the beta 1, 3, the beta 2, 6, and the beta 10, 30. Plugging into this formula over here, we see that these distributions all have a mean of a quarter. So these all have mean a quarter, whereas previously, we were looking at distributions with mean a half. So these all have mean a quarter. And as before, as the parameters increase, we see that the distributions become more and more concentrated about the mean. So this is a little pictorial view of what these beta distributions look like. Now, there's a special case that's worth knowing about and that can be very useful in some circumstances. That occurs when the parameters of the beta, the alpha and the beta parameters are less than one. This for instance is the beta 0.5, 0.5 distribution. What you can see is that the distribution spikes near zero and one. What this means is that if you draw from this distribution, you're very likely to get values that are close to zero or close to one. If you put this prior on the bias of a coin, what you're saying is that you think that the coin is very unfair, that its bias is either very close to one, or very close to zero. For this reason, this is often considered a sparsity-inducing prior. Okay. So now let's return to Laplace's Law of Succession. This was his way of giving a quantitative value for the probability that the sun does not rise tomorrow. So when we talked about this earlier, we justified Laplace's calculation by appealing to Laplace smoothing. However, we did not justify Laplace smoothing. So now let's look at Laplace's answer again, and this time let's justify it from first principles using a Bayesian approach. Okay, so let theta be the probability of interest, which is the probability that the sun rises on any given day. We're following a Bayesian approach, so we have to put a prior on theta. Let's use a uniform prior. Now, what Laplace said is that for the past 5,000 years, the sun has risen every single day. That is to say we have 1,826,000 observations, all of which were heads. Given this data, what is the posterior distribution over theta? Well, if you recall the calculation we did last time, we found that when you have a uniform prior on the bias of a coin, and you observe some number of heads and tails, the posterior distribution on the bias of the coin is the beta distribution. Okay, so specifically, if we have a uniform prior on theta, and then we make some observations consisting of say H heads and T tails, what we saw last time is that the posterior distribution on theta is a beta distribution. It is the beta H plus one, T plus one distribution. Now, in the case of the Law of Succession, we have N observations, all of which are heads. And so the posterior distribution on theta is the beta N plus 1, 1 distribution. Great, so now we know the posterior over theta. This is the entire distribution over theta. And so the probability that the sun rises tomorrow is just the expected value of theta under this distribution. That is the expected bias of the coin under a beta N plus 1, 1 distribution. Using our formula for the mean of the beta distribution, we see that the probability that the sun rises tomorrow is N plus one over N plus two, exactly as Laplace found. Okay, so now let's go ahead and generalize our analysis a little bit. We have a coin of unknown bias theta, or equivalently, there is some unknown probability theta that we wanna estimate. The probability of a female child, the probability of the sun rising, et cetera. Now, previously, in following a Bayesian approach, we said that we were gonna put a uniform prior on theta. Let's generalize this a little bit. Let's say that our prior on theta is some beta distribution. The uniform is just one instance of this, okay? But now we expand the clause of priors that we're allowed. Then we toss the coin N times. That is to say we see N observations. And let's say that of them, S are successes. That is to say heads. What is the posterior distribution on theta? Let's go ahead and compute this. So the posterior distribution is proportional to the prior times the likelihood. What is the prior? Well, the prior is Q (0) of theta, and the likelihood is the probability of our observations. That is to say our data under theta. Okay, now in this case, our prior distribution is an alpha beta beta distribution. So the probability, the prior probability of theta is just proportional to theta to the alpha minus one, one minus theta to the beta minus one. We're leaving out the normalizing factor in the beta density because we're just talking about proportionality. We're gonna leave out all those normalizing constants because we wanna focus on the terms that involve theta. Okay, so that's our prior. Now, what is the likelihood? Well, our observations are S heads and N minus S tails. Okay, so the probability of that is theta to the S, one minus theta to the N minus S. Okay, we also have an N choose S in there, but we're leaving that out because it doesn't involve theta. And when we multiply these together, we get theta to the alpha plus S minus one, one minus theta, beta plus N minus S minus one. And once again, this has the characteristic beta form. So the posterior is again a beta distribution. The posterior is the beta alpha plus S, beta plus N minus S distribution. The posterior lies in the same family, in the same clause of distributions as the prior. Let's go ahead and summarize what we just found. So what we've been trying to do is to estimate some probability, some value theta in the range zero to one. Now, we're adopting a Bayesian approach, so the first thing we need to do is to put a prior distribution on this theta. And we've said, "Let's take our prior distribution to be any beta density." Say, the beta density with parameters alpha, beta. So that's our prior. Now we make a bunch of observations. And it turns that we get S successes and F failures. That is to say S heads and F tails. If that's the case, what we found is the posterior distribution is also a beta distribution. It is an updated beta distribution with these parameters. In a nutshell, if we have a beta prior and a binomial likelihood, we get a beta posterior. The way we summarize this situation is to say that the beta is a conjugate prior for the binomial. What that means is that if we use the beta as a prior for a binomial parameter, the binomial parameter is theta, if we use beta as a prior for theta, then the posterior distribution will again be a beta distribution. The posterior will remain in the same family as the prior. This is a huge convenience in practice. 