(bright chimes) - We have just seen that the beta is a conjugate prior for the binomial. What does that mean? Well, the binomial distribution is all about repeatedly flipping a biased coin, and the parameter of the binomial is the bias of the coin. If we wanna estimate the bias of the coin and we're doing a Bayesian analysis, the first thing we need to do is to put a prior on the coin's bias. If we choose a beta density as the prior, then it turns out that no matter what observations we get, the posterior distribution will also be a beta density. That is to say, if we use a beta prior, the posterior will not be something bizarre. It will also be a nice beta distribution. This is a huge convenience in practice. So now, let's turn to the Poisson distribution. Is there a conjugate prior for the Poisson? Indeed, there is, and it's called the gamma distribution. So the Poisson distribution with parameter theta is a distribution over counts. It's a distribution over non-negative integers. The probability that it assigns to an integer x is given by this formula over here. So theta here is the parameter of the Poisson distribution. In what range does theta lie? Well, it's allowed to be any positive real number, so the only restriction on theta is that it is a positive real. Now, let's say that we want to fit a Poisson distribution to our data. That is to say, we wanna estimate this parameter theta. If we are doing a Bayesian analysis, the first thing we need to do is to put a prior on theta. What prior should we use? Well, this prior needs to be a distribution over the positive reals, and it turns out that a very good choice is to use the gamma distribution. So unlike the Gaussian, which is a distribution over the entire real line, the gamma distribution is only over the positive part of the real line. The gamma has two parameters, alpha and beta, and the density, the probability that it assigns to any positive real number theta, is equal to theta to the alpha minus one times e to the minus beta theta, times this thing, which is just a normalizing factor. Okay, so the important part is over here. These are the terms that depend on theta. So this is a little mysterious to look at. It might be simpler just to see some pictures of gamma densities. So this red line over here is the gamma 1,1 distribution. As you can see, it's a distribution over the positive part of the real line. The blue line is the gamma 1.5,1, and this green line is the gamma 4,1. Here are some basic statistics of the gamma distribution. Now the key part here is that the gamma is a distribution over the positive reals, and the Poisson parameter is constrained to be a positive real. So the gamma is certainly a suitable prior, but we'll see that in fact, it is a conjugate prior. And what that means is that when you try to estimate the parameter theta, the posterior distribution of a theta will also turn out to be a gamma. Let's go ahead and check this, okay. So we're estimating the parameter theta, and this is our prior distribution. We've chosen some gamma distribution, say with parameters alpha, beta as our prior. So this is our prior q0 of theta. This is the Poisson distribution again. And now let's say that we make a few observations. We see some counts, x1 through xn. The xs here are non-negative integers. Based on this data, what is the updated distribution of a theta? What is the posterior distribution? So the posterior distribution of a theta after seeing n observations is something that we'll denote q sub n of theta, and it's proportional to the prior times the likelihood. So the prior is q0 of theta, and the likelihood is the probability of our observations given theta. So let's fill these in. First of all, what's the prior? Well, we're using constants of proportionality, so we're only gonna write down the terms that involve theta. We leave out all of the other multiplicative constants. So the prior then is just theta to the alpha minus one times e to the minus beta theta. What is the probability of the observations x1 through xn under a Poisson distribution with parameter theta? Well, it's the probability of x1 times the probability of x2 times the probability of x3 and so on, so let's do the probability of x1 first. It's e to the minus theta, theta to the x1 over x1 factorial. Now, let's do x2. It's e to the minus theta, theta to the x2 over x2 factorial, all the way to xn, e to the minus theta, theta to the xn over xn factorial. Okay, so now let's simplify this a little bit. We have the first two terms, which are theta to the alpha minus one, e to the minus beta theta. Now, let's collect all the e to the minus thetas together. We have n of them, so we get e to the minus n theta. And now, let's assemble all the powers of theta. We get theta to the x1 plus x2, plus all the way to xn, and then we have this other stuff, the factorials, but those don't depend on theta, so we'll just include them in our proportionality constant. Hmm, this is interesting. This is equal to theta to the alpha plus x1, all the way to xn, minus one, times e to the minus beta plus n theta. This again has the characteristic form of a gamma distribution, so the posterior is a gamma distribution. It is the gamma distribution with parameter alpha plus the sum of all the observations and beta plus n. So indeed, the gamma is a conjugate prior for the Poisson. If we are fitting a Poisson distribution to data and we're doing it the Bayesian way, we need to choose a prior on the Poisson parameter, and the gamma is an excellent choice of prior. 