(thoughtful music) - Now, the binomial distribution is all about biased coins, whereas the multinomial distribution is a generalization that's about k-sided dice. What is the suitable prior for the multinomial? It turns out to be the Dirichlet. So let's take a look at all of this. So in this lecture, we will be following a running example that's based on some well-known work in computational biology. So suppose we have a collection of proteins that are from the same family. That is to say, they have similar sequences, similar structure, similar function. And what we want to do is to estimate the variability amongst these proteins. Now, each protein is a sequence of amino acids, and there are 20 distinct amino acids. Let's call them a1 through a20. So each protein is essentially a string whose characters are drawn from this alphabet. Now, let's say in a toy example that we have three proteins. So we have the first one on top, protein number one. Then we have protein two, and protein three, three proteins from the same family, and the first thing we do is align them. And then we want to estimate the distribution at each position, at the first position, the second position, and so on. And the sort of things we are interested in is is a particular position highly conserved? That is to say, does the same amino acid always appear at that position? Like for example, in this position. Is a position more variable? And if so, what are the amino acids that commonly occur at that position, and so on. So for each position, we wanna estimate the distribution over amino acids at that position. Now, let's focus on this first position over here. What is the distribution we want? Well, at that position, there are 20 possible amino acids, so we want a distribution over 20 outcomes. Let's call the distribution theta. So theta is gonna be a distribution over 20 outcomes. The probability of amino acid number one, the probability of amino acid number two, all the way to amino acid number 20. As a result, theta lies in the 20-dimensional probability simplex, which we denote delta sub 20, the probability simplex of all probability distributions over 20 outcomes. Now, in this toy example, we just have three observations. Two of them are a1, and one of them is a3. So the maximum likelihood estimate of the distribution at this first position would simply be to say that, well, two thirds of the time, we see amino acid a1, we never see amino acid a2, one third of the time, we see amino acid a3, and we never see the other ones. This would be our maximum likelihood estimate of the distribution at that first position given this very limited data. But of course, this estimate needs to be smoothed. And what we're gonna do is to follow a more sophisticated Bayesian approach. Now, in doing so, the first thing we need to do is to specify a prior distribution on theta. That is to say, a prior distribution over the probability simplex delta sub 20. And it turns out that a great choice is the Dirichlet distribution. Let's see what this is. Okay, so we are estimating a distribution theta that lies in the 20-dimensional probability simplex, a distribution over 20 outcomes. So it lies in the k-dimensional probability simplex for k equals 20. But we are gonna talk about k more generally over here. So we need a distribution over theta. A good choice is the Dirichlet distribution. This is specified by k parameters, which we'll call alpha one, alpha two, all the way to alpha k. And what the Dirichlet distribution says is that the probability it assigns to any theta vector is equal to theta one to the alpha one minus one, theta two to the alpha two minus one, all the way to theta k to the alpha k minus one, times this thing in front, which is just a normalizing factor. So this is the form of the Dirichlet distribution, and it turns out that it has these basic statistics. Okay, so this is a distribution over the k-dimensional probability simplex. Each time you draw from the Dirichlet distribution, you get some distribution over k outcomes. And if you keep drawing over and over again, the average distribution you get from this formula will be alpha one over the sum of the alphas, alpha two over the sum of the alphas, all the way to alpha k over the sum of the alphas. And of course, these numbers are positive, and add up to one, okay, because you always get distributions when you draw from a Dirichlet. Now, another thing that you might have observed is that this distribution looks rather like a beta, and in fact, it's a direct generalization of the beta distribution. The beta is simply a two-dimensional Dirichlet. So the beta distribution with parameter alpha one, alpha two, is exactly the same as the Dirichlet distribution with those two parameters. The beta is a two-dimensional Dirichlet. Now, as usual, these formulas can be a little confusing just by themselves, and it's easier just to look at pictures of these Dirichlets. So in all of these pictures, we have k equals three. That is to say that we are looking at distributions over three outcomes. And this triangle represents all distributions over three outcomes. It represents the probability simplex of three-dimensional distributions. This corner of the triangle is the distribution that places all its weight on the first outcome, this corner is the distribution that places all its weight on the second outcome, and this corner is the distribution that places the entire weight on the third outcome. And everything else inside the triangle is some probability distribution over these three outcomes. So up here, we see the Dirichlet distribution with parameters 1, 1, 1. As you can see, this is the uniform distribution. It tells us that any theta is equally likely. What is the mean? Well, it's simply 1/3, 1/3, 1/3. It's that point right here. So the mean is 1/3, 1/3, 1/3. Next, we have the Dirichlet 2, 2, 2. It has the same mean. Then, the Dirichlet 4, 4, 4, again, the same mean. And the Dirichlet 8, 8, 8, again, the same mean. So these are all distributions over the probability simplex delta sub three, but you can see that they're getting increasingly concentrated around the mean. In the next row, we have a bunch of Dirichlets, with parameters like 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 4, 3, 3, 6, 6, 6, 12. And these all have mean 1/4, 1/4, 1/2. So the mean lies somewhere here. This is the mean for all of these Dirichlets. And as before, they're getting increasingly concentrated as we move to the right. Now, one case of interest is when you have a Dirichlet distribution whose parameters are less than one. So this, for example, is the Dirichlet with parameters 0.5, 0.5, 0.5. And this distribution is concentrated right at the corners of the simplex. When you draw from this Dirichlet, you are likely to get a distribution that is concentrated at one particular outcome. And so this is a sparsity-inducing prior, very useful in many applications. So when we want sparse distributions, we choose the Dirichlet parameters to be less than one. Okay, so now we've been claiming that the Dirichlet is a conjugate prior for the multinomial, okay, so let's check this. So what we are trying to do is to estimate some distribution theta, that's our multinomial parameter, and we are doing it the Bayesian way. So we are putting a prior on it. Now, if we are dealing with k outcomes, theta lies in the k-dimensional probability simplex, and we'll use a k-dimensional Dirichlet as the prior. Let's say we choose the Dirichlet distribution whose parameters are alpha one through alpha k. So this is our prior, q0 of theta. Now we get some observations. Let's say that we draw in samples, and out of those, x1 of them turn out to be one, to be outcome number one, x2 of them turn out to be outcome number two, and xk of them turn out to be outcome number k. Okay, so these numbers are gonna add up to n, x1 plus x2 plus xk equals n. We are simply keeping count of the number of times we see outcome one, the number of times we see outcome two, and so on. What's the posterior distribution? What is qn of theta, the distribution over theta once we take these observations into account? Well, as always, it's proportional to the prior times the likelihood, which is the probability of these observations given theta. So what is the prior? Well, the prior had some big normalizing factor in front, we're not gonna worry about it. We'll just write down the terms that include theta, and it's theta one to the alpha one minus one, theta two to the alpha two minus one, all the way to theta k to the alpha k minus one. This is the prior distribution on theta. And now we do the likelihood. What is the probability of seeing outcome one x1 times? Well, that's theta one to the x1. What's the probability of seeing outcome two x2 times? Well, that's theta two to the x2. What's the probability of seeing outcome k xk times? Well, the probability of seeing outcome k is theta k. The probability of seeing it xk times is theta k to the xk. And so when we combine terms, we see that we get theta one to the alpha one plus x1 minus one, theta two to the alpha two plus x2 minus one, all the way to theta k to the alpha k plus xk minus one. This again has the signature form of a Dirichlet distribution. So the posterior is again a Dirichlet. In fact, it is the Dirichlet distribution with parameters alpha one plus x1 all the way to alpha k plus xk. So the posterior distribution is not complicated at all. It has a very simple form. It's in the same family as the prior distribution. Okay, now in order to use this methodology, we have to choose a concrete parameters for the Dirichlet prior. How do we choose these? Well, let's return to our biology example. So let's say that we have some prior knowledge about these protein sequences, or perhaps we have some knowledge that we have gleaned from some initial exploratory analysis. And let's say it turns out, for instance, that 25% of the positions are highly conserved. That means that you always see the same amino acid at those positions. What sort of prior should we use then? Well, if we are expecting the distributions to be highly conserved, that means we're expecting very sparse distributions. That means we should use a Dirichlet whose alpha values are less than one. So this would suggest using a Dirichlet distribution with alpha one through alpha 20, okay, because they're 20 amino acids, where the alpha sub i's are less than one, because this would be a sparsity inducing prior. But that's only 25% of the positions. Let's say that there are some other positions at which you do get some variability, but that there is a small set of amino acids that frequently occur, maybe these two, and this one, and this one. What kind of prior would encode that? Well, what we could do is to again use a Dirichlet prior, alpha one through alpha 20, but this time, use a prior that has a higher weight on those four positions. So with larger values of these particular alpha i's. And let's say that there's another set of positions at which there's a different set of amino acids that frequently occur. What would we do for those positions? Well, there we would want to use, again, a Dirichlet prior which has larger values at these alpha i's, of these other positions. Hmm, so that's interesting. It seems like these different types of positions are drawing us in different directions. What kind of compromise can we reach? Should we go more towards this? Let's call this vector alpha superscript one, or should we go more towards this, or should we go more towards this? Or is there some way to combine all of these? And it turns out that there is a way to combine them. Our prior can be a mixture of Dirichlets. We can say that our prior is 0.25, a Dirichlet distribution with parameter alpha to the one, plus 0.12, a Dirichlet distribution with parameter alpha to the two, and so on, however many components we want. Hmm, but what is the posterior distribution if we use this slightly more complicated type of prior? So what we are suggesting now is that instead of choosing a prior that's a single Dirichlet, we let the prior be a mixture of Dirichlets, to reflect the different types of positions that we expect. It turns out that if we do this, the posterior is again a mixture of Dirichlets. So just like the Dirichlet is a conjugate prior for the multinomial, a mixture of Dirichlets is also a conjugate prior, and this is the right thing to do in this particular setting. 