(gentle music) - Welcome back. Now, we're all familiar with the six-sided dice. It has six faces, numbered one through six, and when you roll the dice, each face has a probability exactly one sixth of coming up. Imagine, instead, a dice with an arbitrary number of faces, where different faces can come up with different probabilities. This is the multinomial distribution. So let's say that we have a dice with K faces numbered one through K. The probability of seeing face one when you roll the dice is P sub one. The probability of seeing face two is P sub two. The probability of seeing face K is P sub K. Now of course, these probabilities have to add up to one. Now, suppose we have this dice and we roll it N times and count the number of times we see face J. Let's call that X sub J. Okay, so in this way we can count the number of times we see face one, the number of times we see face two, all the way to face K. So we have K different counts. We can assemble these into a vector, X, and the distribution of this vector, the distribution of these K counts, the number of times we saw face one, the number of times we saw face two, and so on, is called the multinomial distribution. So let's look at some basic statistics of this distribution. What is the expected number of times of seeing the first face? Well, each time we roll the dice, there's a probability, P one, of seeing the first face. So if we do the dice N times, the expected number of times we see the first face is N times P one. Likewise, the expected number of times of seeing the second face is N times P two and so on. And so in this way we can get the expected value of the vector, X. Likewise, we can figure out the probability that we see the first face exactly N one times and the second face exactly N two times and the K face exactly sub K times. It's given by this formula, which is basically just a generalization of the formula we had for the binomial distribution. It's a little bit complicated, so let's not worry too much about it. Instead, let's turn to an application of the multinomial. The multinomial is widely used in modeling text data in coming up with probabilistic models for text. Let's see how this works. So what we start with is some fixed vocabulary. Let's call it V and let's say that it consists for example, of the 10,000 most common English words. So the 10,000 most common words in English. Now, let's assign each word a probability. Okay, so these are the probabilities of the first word, the probability of the second word, and so on. And these probabilities represent the frequencies of the words and they have to add up to one. Now you can imagine creating a dice with 10,000 faces. The ith face has got the ith word written on it and the probability that that face comes up is exactly P sub i. This dice gives us an interesting way to generate random documents. The way we generate a document is we take the dice and we roll it and whatever word shows up on top, we write that word down and then we roll it the dice again and whatever word comes up, we write that word down and then we roll it again. And in this way, we generate a document at random. So this dice, this multinomial dice, gives us a way to generate random text. It also gives us a way to assign a probability to any existing text document. Nice and simple. Now, by itself, the multinomial distribution is a somewhat crude model of text, but there are more sophisticated ways of putting together multiple multinomials. For example, in topic models. And these have proved to be very useful in modeling and analyzing text data. 