(bright music) - In the first part of the course, we talked about the basic primitives of unsupervised learning, methods like k-means clustering and principal component analysis. These are bread and butter methods that are quick and easy and are used all the time. The downside is that they're somewhat rigid in their modeling ability. For instance, they don't make it easy to specify prior knowledge about the data domain. We're now beginning the second part of the course, which will be all about probabilistic modeling, that is, modeling data using probability distributions. These models are richer and more sophisticated, and as a result, also more flexible. So let's say we have a large dataset and want to understand it better. One thing we could do, one thing really quick, is to compute some basic summary statistics, like the mean and variance, or we could cluster the data. A different approach is to fit a probability distribution to the data. If the distribution is relatively simple and relatively compact, then it can help us to understand the data as a form of exploratory data analysis. We can also subsequently use this distribution as a proxy for the data. For instance, we can sample from the distribution in order to get new data points. So what kind of distributions are we talking about over here? Well, we'll be covering a wide variety of different probability distributions, but for now, let's start with the very basic ones, the Gaussian, the Poisson, the binomial, and the multinomial distribution. The Gaussian distribution is also called the normal distribution. Here's what it looks like. The Gaussian is specified by two parameters, the mean, which we'll denote by the Greek letter mu, and the variance, which we'll denote by sigma squared. Often we'll use N mu sigma squared as a shorthand for the Gaussian distribution, the normal distribution, with parameters mu and sigma squared. Now, the actual distribution itself, the density, is given by this formula over here. It looks a little bit forbidding initially, but one gets used to it pretty quickly. For the time being, one important thing to observe is that this density is greater than zero everywhere on the real line, so the Gaussian is a distribution on the real line that assigns a density greater than zero to every point on the line. Now, the density is highest at the mean, mu, and it's symmetric about the mean and drops off fairly rapidly. About 68% of the distribution lies within one standard deviation of the mean. About 95% lies within two standard deviations, and almost the entire distribution, about 99.7%, lies within three standard deviations of the mean. Okay, so this is the rough profile of the Gaussian, or normal, distribution. Now, why is the Gaussian called the normal distribution? Well, basically because a lot of naturally occurring data looks Gaussian. Here, for example, is the distribution of heights of men and women in the United States. The blue curve shows the distribution of heights of men, and the pink curves shows the women. As you can see, these two distributions look very Gaussian. So this is a little strange. Why is it the case that so much data looks Gaussian? One possible reason for this is given by a mathematical result called the central limit theorem. So here's what the result says. Let X1, X2, and so on be random variables that are independent. Now, they could be arbitrary. For example, X1 could be zero one valued. They could be discrete, continuous, anything. What the central limit theorem says is that, if you add up these random variables, or if you average them, the result looks Gaussian. And this is really quite astonishing, because the individual random variables, X1, X2, et cetera, could be very far from Gaussian. They could, for example, be binary, zero one valued, and yet when you add them up or average them, they are guaranteed to look Gaussian. So returning to heights, could the central limit theorem explain why the distribution of heights is Gaussian? Possibly. Perhaps height is an additive combination of independent genetic and environmental factors. Now, let's move to a very concrete question. When we have a set of data points, how do we fit a Gaussian to them? Okay, so let's say we have N data items X1 through Xn, and these are all real numbers. How do we fit a Gaussian to these numbers? Okay, in order to fit a Gaussian, we have to specify the mean and the variance. How do we do that? Well, perhaps the most obvious thing is to simply set mu to the empirical mean and sigma squared to the empirical variance. So what we are saying is just set mu to be the empirical mean, that is, the average of the observed data. And likewise, we can set sigma squared to the empirical variance. So that's X1 minus the empirical mean squared all the way to Xn minus the empirical mean squared over N, the empirical variance And that's it. Fitting a Gaussian to data is very easy indeed. 