(intro jingle) - When we want to fit a distribution to data, which distribution should we choose? To answer this question, we will appeal to the maximum likelihood principle. So here's the setup. We have a dataset. And we want to fit a distribution to this data. Now the distribution that we're gonna choose will be from some family P. For example, Poisson distributions or Gaussian distributions. Now the distributions in this family are all parameterized by some parameter data. For example, if P is the family of Gaussian distributions. Then the parameter theta is the mean of the Gaussian. And the variance of the Gaussian. So every distribution in this family is indexed by its parameter. The maximum likelihood principle says to choose the distribution that makes our observed data as likely as possible. To choose the distribution that maximizes the probability of the observed data. Finding this distribution consists of three steps. First, we write down an expression for the likelihood. That is, the probability of our observed data under one of these models. Now it turns out that it's usually a little easier to deal with the logarithm of the likelihood. So the next step is to write down the log of the likelihood. Maximizing a function is the same as maximizing the log of the function. So it's equivalent to deal with the log likelihood. And finally, we find the distribution or equivalently the parameter theta that maximizes the log likelihood. In a nutshell, this is the distribution in our family, or equivalently the parameter theta, that assigns our observed data the largest possible probability. That makes our data seem as likely as possible. Now let's see how this plays out in the case of the Poisson distribution. So in this case our family. Consists of all Poisson distributions. And these are parameterized by a single value lambda. Now our dataset consists of some observations, let's call them X1 through Xn. And we want to find the best Poisson model for our data. The maximum likelihood model. What is this model? Well the first step is to write down an expression for the likelihood. So what is the probability of our data under the Poisson lambda model? Well it's the probability of the first data point. Times the probability of the second data point. Times the probability of the third data point. All the way to the probability of the Nth data point. And what are these probabilities? Well recalling the form of the Poisson distribution, the probability of X1 is E to the minus lambda times lambda to the X1 over X1 factorial. And all the way to Xn we get E to the minus lambda. Lambda to the Xn over Xn factorial. So let's assemble these terms a little bit. We have N terms and each of them starts with E to the minus lambda, so we get E to the minus N lambda. Then we have lambda to the X1, lambda to the X2, lambda to the X3 and so on. Putting them all together we get lambda to the X1 plus X2 all the way to Xn. And then we have these denominators. X1 factorial, X2 factorial, all the way to Xn factorial. So we get this large denominator. X1 factorial, X2 factorial, all the way to Xn factorial. So now we have an expression. This formula over here. Which gives us the probability of our observed data, X1 through Xn, under the Poisson lambda model. And what we want to do is define the parameter lambda that maximizes this expression. Now what we said is that it's usually a little easier to deal with the log of the likelihood. And that's fine because maximizing this expression is the same as maximizing the log of this expression. It's the same value lambda that will maximize both of them. So let's go ahead and take the log. We'll write down LL for log likelihood. And now let's take the log of this thing. Now we can take the logarithm to any base. But it's usually the most convenient to take the natural logarithm. That is logarithm base E. So if we do that, the first term becomes negative N lambda. The second term becomes X1 plus Xn. Times the natural logarithm of lambda. And the third term becomes minus the natural logarithm of X1 factorial, X2 factorial, all the way to Xn factorial. Good. We now have the log likelihood. And indeed it's a little simpler than the original likelihood. Now what we want to do is define the setting of lambda that maximizes this. Usually we would do this by calling some sort of optimization routine. But since this is a relatively simple formula, we can just do it directly using calculus. We can just take the derivative of the log likelihood and set it to zero. Let's try that. So the derivative of the log likelihood with respect to lambda. Is, well, for the first term we get negative N. For the second term we get. X1 plus all the way to Xn over lambda. And for the third term we get zero because there's no lambda in there at all. Now we set the derivative to zero. And that tells us that lambda should be X1. All the way to Xn divided by N. In other words, lambda should be the empirical mean of the data. Now if you recall, when we were talking about the Poisson we were a little confused about how to set lambda. Should it be the empirical mean or the empirical variance? Well now we have an answer. The maximum likelihood principle tells us that when fitting a dataset, we should set lambda to the empirical mean. We can do a similar thing with the Gaussian distribution. So suppose we have end data points X1 through Xn. And we want to fit a Gaussian to them. That means that we have to choose the parameters mu and sigma squared. The mean and variance of the Gaussian. So again, we follow our three steps. The first step is to write down an expression for the likelihood. The probability of the data. Under a particular model given by mu and sigma squared. So what is that? Well it's the probability of X1 times the probability of X2 times the probability of X3 and so on. Now in this parenthesis we have the formula for the probability of Xi. Under the Gaussian given by mu and sigma squared. And we take the product of that. From I equals one, two, three, all the way to N. And this is the likelihood of the data. The probability of the data under the model mu sigma squared. Now as usual, things become a little easier if we work with the log likelihood. Which is simply the logarithm of this expression. When we compute it, we get this simpler expression over here. So that's the log likelihood. And we want to find the mu and sigma squared that maximize this. Once again, we can do this by calculus. Now this time there are two parameters, mu and sigma, so we can take the derivative with respect to mu and set it to zero. And we can take the derivative with respect to sigma and set it to zero. So we take the derivative of the log likelihood with respect to mu. And we set it to zero. And then we take the derivative of the log likelihood with respect to sigma. And we set that to zero. And when we do that. We find that the correct setting of mu is as the empirical mean of the data. And the maximum likelihood choice of sigma squared is the empirical variance. So in both these cases, in the case of the Gaussian and the case of the Poisson, maximum likelihood gives us a simple way to set the parameters. And it gives us a solution that also corroborates our basic intuition. Going forward, we will almost always fit distributions using maximum likelihood. 