(lively music) - We now turn to the binomial distribution. This is perhaps the simplest distribution of all. It tells us about the bias of a coin, that is the probability that a coin turns up heads. So let's say that we have a coin whose bias is some number p. Each time we flip the coin, the probability that it comes up heads is exactly p. Now, we flip this coin n times and let X be the number of times we observe heads. So X is something in the range zero, one, two, all the way to n. If X equals zero, it means every coin toss produced the tails. If X equals n, every coin toss was heads. What is the probability that X takes on a value k? Well, let's figure this out. So we have n tosses, one, two, three, four, all the way to n. What's the chance that k of them turn up heads? Well, let's first choose the locations of these k. Maybe the k tosses are these. So the number of different ways of choosing k locations out of n is n choose k. Now, once we fix those locations, the probability that we get heads on those k tosses is p to the k. And the probability that we get tails on the remaining n minus k slots is one minus p to the n minus k. So this is the probability that X takes on the specific value k. Now, it turns out that the expected value of X, the average number of heads, is n times p. And the variance of X is a little bit smaller than that, it's n times p times one minus p. In this picture, we have a particular binomial distribution. Can you guess which one it is? Well, let's take a look. So we see that the outcomes range from 0 to 20. That must mean that n equals 20. The number of possible heads lies in the range of 0 to 20. Now, the average outcome seems to be roughly 15. That's n times p, which means that p must be 0.75. So what we see here is the binomial 20, 0.75 distribution. So the binomial distribution occurs every time we do surveys. Let's say, for example, that we want to determine what fraction of people in our town like sushi. Now, we could just go and ask everybody, but that's likely to be impractical. So instead, we choose, say, 1,000 people at random and ask them. Let's say that out of those 1,000 people, 600 say they like sushi. So, what should our estimate be of the fraction of people who like sushi? Well, clearly it should be 60% or 0.6. How did this relate to a binomial distribution? Well, there is some unknown fraction of people who like sushi, let's call that p. Every time we choose a person at random and ask them, do you like sushi? It is exactly equivalent to flipping a coin of bias p. What we've done is to flip this coin 1,000 times and check the number of heads that we find. Okay, so more generally, let's say that we have a coin of unknown bias p and we toss it n times. We observe that k of those tosses come up heads. How should we estimate the bias of the coin? Well, it seems obvious that we should estimate the bias to be k over n. But this is an intuitive choice. What would the maximum likelihood principle tell us in this case? Well, let's work it out. So we toss a coin n times, and k of them turn up heads. Now, this is our data. Based on this data, we wanna estimate p. So the first step is to write down an expression for the likelihood. So the probability of our observed data, given the model p, is the probability of seeing k heads under a binomial n, p distribution. Okay, so it's the probability of k heads given p. And we've already seen an expression for that, it's n choose k times p to the k times one minus p to the n minus k. Great, we have the likelihood. Our next step is to get the log likelihood. Let's call this LL. And the log likelihood for p is just the logarithm of this. Let's do the natural logarithm. So it's the natural logarithm of n choose k plus k times the natural logarithm of p plus n minus k times the natural logarithm of one minus p. And finally, we have to find the value of p that maximizes this expression. How do we do that? Well, let's just take the derivative with respect to p and set it to zero. So we wanna maximize this. Let's take the derivative of this with respect to p. What is that? Well, the first term doesn't even have p in it, so it becomes zero. The second term, k ln p. When we take the derivative of that, we get k over p. And the third term becomes n minus k over one minus p. So now we set the derivative to zero. And when we do that, we get p equals k over n, exactly as we would've wanted. So once again, the maximum likelihood principle gives us the answer that would've been most intuitive to us in this setting. Now, this all sounds well and good, but it turns out that this particular estimator, k over n, can actually run into trouble. Let's see an example of when that might happen. So here's a small example. Suppose that we have two coins and we have no idea what the bias of these coins is. So we take the first coin, we toss it 10 times, and it comes up heads every single time. Based on maximum likelihood, we would estimate the bias of this coin as being 1.0. 10 tosses, heads every time. Now we pick up the second coin and we toss it 10 times, and it comes up heads only once. The maximum likelihood estimate of the bias would be 0.1. Okay, so those are our two coins. Now somebody comes along, takes the two coins, and selects one of them without telling us which one he selected. He flips that coin 20 times and it comes up heads 19 out of the 20 times. Which coin do we think it is? Well, obviously it's the first coin. Okay, the first coin has a very high probability of coming up heads, and the second coin has a very high probability of coming up tails, so clearly his coin must be the first coin. And that is intuitively correct. But now let's look a little bit more closely at the likelihood of this event under our two estimates. So if the coin, the first coin, is one whose bias we've estimated to be one, the probability of seeing 19 heads out of 20 coin tosses is zero. Because if the bias is one, the coin has to come up heads every single time. On the other hand, the second coin was one whose bias we estimated to be 0.1. What is the probability that when you toss it 20 times you get 19 heads? Well, it's a very small probability, but it's greater than zero. So this is something greater than zero. So under this calculation, it would seem that the observation is actually more likely under the second coin, which makes no sense at all. So, what went wrong over here? What went wrong is that we should never estimate the bias of the coin to be zero or one because this completely rules out the other possibility. We should always have the bias to be something strictly between zero and one, so that there's always some small chance of seeing the other outcome. So this adjustment to the maximum likelihood estimate is called smoothing the estimate. A common way of smoothing is called Laplace smoothing. In this case, when you toss a coin n times and you observe k heads, instead of estimating the bias to be k over n, you estimate it to be k plus one over n plus two. Now, notice that this is never zero or one. What leads to this precise expression. So later on, we will justify this exactly, but for the time being, notice that it's equivalent to the following. It's equivalent to taking our n observations. So taking the n observations with the k heads and then tacking on two extra observations, one head and one tail. So that gives a total of n plus two observations of which k plus one are heads, okay? So this is a simple way to smooth the maximum likelihood estimate of the bias of the coin, and it makes sure that we never get an estimate that is zero or one. Now, Laplace used this estimate to answer a question that seemed unanswerable. The question was, what is the probability that the sun will not rise tomorrow? Now, Laplace did not want to rule this out completely. He thought, everything's possible, so he didn't wanna say that the probability is zero. Instead, he gave a precise answer. He said, "This is the probability that the sun will not rise tomorrow." It is one over 1,825,002. How did he get this number? Well, this was his reasoning. He said that people have been keeping written records for the past 5,000 years. Now, if there had been any day during the past 5,000 years where the sun had not risen, it would've been a very noteworthy occurrence and we would have some written record of it. So the fact that there's no such record means that the sun has risen every single day for the past 5,000 years, and that's a total of this many days, 1,825,000 approximately. So this is like flipping a coin this many times and it coming up tails every single time. What is our estimate of the bias of the coin? Well, this is the estimate of the coin's bias with Laplace smoothing. So let's wrap up our discussion of the binomial by pointing out that in many situations, the binomial can be approximated very well by a Gaussian distribution. So on the left over here, we have the binomial distribution 50, 0.5, okay? So the bias of the coin is 0.5, that means it's a fair coin, and we are tossing it 50 times and counting the number of heads. So the average number of heads is 25, as we would expect, and this is what the distribution looks like, okay? So the mean is 25, n times p, and the variance is n times p times one minus p, so 50 times 0.5 times 0.5, which is 12.5. That's the mean and variance of this binomial distribution. Now let's look at the Gaussian distribution with the same mean and variance. That's the Gaussian distribution with mean 25 and variance 12.5. You can see that it looks almost identical to the binomial distribution. This is a direct consequence of the central limit theorem. Okay, so more generally, if we have the binomial n, p distribution, we know that its mean is n times p and its variance is n times p times one minus p. And what we are saying is that this distribution is really quite close to the Gaussian distribution with this mean and this variance. And so in many situations that seem to demand the binomial distribution, we can, if we like, instead use this Gaussian approximation. And indeed, that's what's done in a lot of sampling. Okay, so that wraps up our discussion of the binomial. Next time, we'll turn to a generalization called the multinomial distribution. 